1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1530
Printed pursuant to Senate Interim Rule 213.28 by order of the President of the Senate in conformance with pre-
session filing rules, indicating neither advocacy nor opposition on the part of the President (at the request
of Senate Interim Committee on Veterans, Emergency Management, Federal and World Affairs)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: The Act changes a crime to include subjecting a public official to alarm by conveying
a threat. The Act goes into effect when the Governor signs it. (Flesch Readability Score: 64.6).
Expands the crime of aggravated harassment to include threats concerning public officials in
specified circumstances. Punishes by a maximum of five years’ imprisonment, a fine of up to
$125,000, or both.
Declares an emergency, effective on passage.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to crime; amending ORS 166.070; and declaring an emergency.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. ORS 166.070 is amended to read:
166.070. (1) A person commits the crime of aggravated harassment if the person, knowing that
the other person is a:
(a) Staff member, knowingly propels saliva, blood, urine, semen, feces or other dangerous sub-
stance at the staff member while the staff member is acting in the course of official duty or as a
result of the staff member’s official duties;
(b) Public safety officer, knowingly propels blood, urine, semen or feces at the public safety of-
ficer while the public safety officer is acting in the course of official duty or as a result of the public
safety officer’s official duties; [or]
(c) Public safety officer, intentionally propels saliva at the public safety officer, and the saliva
comes into physical contact with the public safety officer, while the public safety officer is acting
in the course of official duty or as a result of the public safety officer’s official duties[.]; or
(d) Public official, intentionally subjects the public official to alarm by conveying to the
public official, or to any member of the public official’s family, a telephonic, electronic or
written threat to inflict serious physical injury on the public official or family member, the
threat would reasonably be expected to cause alarm, and the person conveyed the threat
because of:
(A) The performance or nonperformance of a public duty of the public official;
(B) The status or position of the public official; or
(C) Any other factor related to the public official’s office or duties.
(2) Aggravated harassment is a Class C felony. When a person is convicted of violating sub-
section (1)(a) of this section, in addition to any other sentence it may impose, the court shall impose
a term of incarceration in a state correctional facility.
(3) As used in this section:
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 274
SB 1530
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
(a) “Public official” means:
(A) A person who is elected or appointed, or who has filed the required documents for
nomination or election, to an office established, and the qualifications and duties of which
are prescribed, by statute or the Oregon Constitution to perform a public duty for the state
or any political subdivision of the state; and
(B) An assistant or deputy district attorney, a person serving as a prosecutor for a city
or county, an assistant attorney general, an administrative law judge and a judge serving
upon appointment as a senior judge or a judge pro tempore.
[(a)] (b) “Public safety officer” means an emergency medical services provider as defined in ORS
682.025, a regulatory specialist as defined in ORS 471.001 or a fire service professional, a parole and
probation officer or a police officer as those terms are defined in ORS 181A.355.
[(b)] (c) “Staff member” has the meaning given that term in ORS 163.165.
SECTION 2. This 2026 Act being necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
peace, health and safety, an emergency is declared to exist, and this 2026 Act takes effect
on its passage.
[2]
