1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1550
Sponsored by Senator GELSER BLOUIN, Representative NOSSE, Senators MEEK, PROZANSKI; Senators
BROADMAN, WEBER, Representatives DOBSON, MCDONALD, WALTERS (Presession filed.)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: This Act changes laws related to what government must do after a person dies in some
situations. (Flesch Readability Score: 60.1).
Directs law enforcement, prior to making any findings as to the cause or manner of death where
the decedent is suspected to have died from suicide, overdose or accident, to interview family
members of the decedent if the decedent has a history as a victim of domestic violence or child
abuse and certain conditions exist.
Requires law enforcement to submit a written request to the district medical examiner for the
performance of an autopsy if a reasonable basis exists that the death of the decedent may be the
result of domestic violence or child abuse.
Directs a medical examiner or district attorney to order the performance of an autopsy in cer-
tain circumstances.
Provides that certain individuals may examine and obtain copies of evidence generated during
an autopsy or investigation of death.
Requires law enforcement to provide notice of rights to certain members of the decedent’s family
upon opening an investigation of death that is suspected to have been caused by suicide, overdose
or accident.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to scrutinizing death; creating new provisions; and amending ORS 146.003, 146.035 and
146.117.
Whereas in some suspicious death cases the decedent has a history as a victim of domestic vi-
olence or child abuse and the manner of death is prematurely determined to be suicide or accident
without a comprehensive investigation into the circumstances of death; and
Whereas homicides related to domestic violence or child abuse are susceptible to staging or al-
teration of the death scene before investigators can conduct a scene investigation; and
Whereas staged or altered death scenes compromise the ability of investigators to evaluate the
manner of death and may impede the responsibility of the medical examiner to perform an autopsy;
and
Whereas research has identified 10 red flags in suspicious death cases involving a decedent with
a history as a victim of domestic violence that can improve the ability of investigators to ensure
complete investigations and accurate determinations of the manner of death; and
Whereas federal law provides family members of homicide victims the right to obtain informa-
tion, access victim services and request an independent review of initial findings or the investigation
of the death of a family member in case under federal jurisdiction; and
Whereas it is the intent of the Legislative Assembly to provide victim services and support to
family members in suspicious death cases and to support family members who seek a second opinion
on the death of their loved one whenever practicable at no cost to any public agency; now, there-
fore,
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 64
SB 1550
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 1. ORS 146.003 is amended to read:
146.003. As used in ORS 146.003 to 146.189 and 146.710 to 146.992, unless the context requires
otherwise:
(1) “Approved laboratory” means a laboratory approved by the Chief Medical Examiner as
competent to perform the blood sample analysis required by ORS 146.113 (2).
(2) “Assistant district medical examiner” means a physician licensed under ORS chapter 677,
physician associate licensed under ORS 677.505 to 677.525 or nurse practitioner licensed under ORS
678.375 to 678.390 appointed by the district medical examiner to investigate and certify deaths
within a county or district.
(3) “Cause of death” means the primary or basic disease process or injury ending life.
(4) “Death requiring investigation” means the death of a person occurring in any one of the
circumstances set forth in ORS 146.090.
(5) “District medical examiner” means a physician licensed under ORS chapter 677, physician
associate licensed under ORS 677.505 to 677.525 or nurse practitioner licensed under ORS 678.375
to 678.390 appointed by the Chief Medical Examiner to investigate and certify deaths within a
county or district, including a Deputy State Medical Examiner.
(6) “Law enforcement agency” means a county sheriff’s office, municipal police department, po-
lice department established by a university under ORS 352.121 or 353.125 and the Oregon State Po-
lice.
(7) “Legal intervention” includes an execution pursuant to ORS 137.463, 137.467 and 137.473 and
other legal use of force resulting in death.
(8) “Manner of death” means the designation of the probable mode of production of the cause
of death, including natural, accidental, suicidal, homicidal, legal intervention or undetermined.
(9) “Medical examiner” means a physician licensed under ORS chapter 677, physician associate
licensed under ORS 677.505 to 677.525 or nurse practitioner licensed under ORS 678.375 to 678.390
appointed as provided by ORS 146.003 to 146.189 to investigate and certify the cause and manner
of deaths requiring investigation, including the Chief Medical Examiner.
(10) “Medical-legal death investigator” means a person appointed by the district medical exam-
iner to assist in the investigation of deaths within a county.
(11) “Partner” means a decedent’s spouse, former spouse, cohabitant, former cohabitant,
parent of the decedent’s child or any individual with whom the decedent had a romantic re-
lationship or engagement for marriage.
[(11)] (12) “Pathologist” means a physician licensed under ORS chapter 677 who is eligible for
certification by the American Board of Pathology, or its successor organization, as approved by the
State Medical Examiner Advisory Board.
[(12)] (13) “Unidentified human remains” does not include human remains that are unidentified
human remains that are part of an archaeological site or suspected of being Native American and
covered under ORS chapters 97 and 390 and ORS 358.905 to 358.961.
LAW ENFORCEMENT INVESTIGATION OF SUSPICIOUS DEATHS;
MANDATORY FAMILY INTERVIEWS AND AUTOPSY REQUESTS
SECTION 2. Section 3 of this 2026 Act is added to and made a part of ORS 146.003 to
[2]
SB 1550
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
146.189.
SECTION 3. (1) If a decedent who is suspected to have died from suicide, overdose or
accident has previously been identified as a victim of domestic violence or actual or sus-
pected child abuse in police reports, reports made to or by government agencies, writings
or photographs, restraining order declarations, eyewitness statements or other evidence, an
investigator or officer employed by a law enforcement agency shall, prior to making any
findings as to the cause or manner of death, interview family members of the decedent who
have information relevant to the domestic violence or child abuse upon the occurrence of
three or more of the following conditions:
(a) The decedent died prematurely or in an untimely manner.
(b) The scene of death suggests the appearance of death by suicide, overdose or accident.
(c) The decedent was in a romantic relationship in which the decedent or the partner
wanted the relationship to end.
(d) The decedent has a history as a victim of domestic violence, including coercive con-
trol.
(e) The decedent is a minor child with a history as a victim of child abuse, or the subject
of a report of suspected child abuse, within the past 12 months and was found by a parent,
guardian or caregiver who is the perpetrator or alleged perpetrator of such abuse.
(f) The decedent is found dead in a home or place of residence.
(g) The decedent is found by the partner.
(h) The decedent has a history as a victim of domestic violence, including strangulation
or suffocation.
(i) The decedent is last seen alive by the partner, the child of the decedent, the child of
the partner or, if the decedent is a minor child as described in paragraph (e) of this sub-
section, the child’s parent, guardian or caregiver who was the perpetrator or alleged
perpetrator of such abuse.
(j) The partner had control of the scene of death before law enforcement arrived or, if
the decedent is a minor child as described in paragraph (e) of this subsection, the child’s
parent, guardian or caregiver who was the perpetrator or alleged perpetrator of such abuse
had control of the scene of death before law enforcement arrived.
(k) The body of the decedent has been moved from the location where death occurred or
the scene of death or other evidence otherwise appears altered.
(2) If an investigator or officer employed by a law enforcement agency determines a
reasonable basis exists to suspect that the death of a decedent, as described in subsection
(1) of this section, may be the result of domestic violence or child abuse, the investigator or
officer shall submit a written request to the district medical examiner for the county where
the death occurred for the performance of an autopsy under ORS 146.117.
AUTOPSIES
SECTION 4. ORS 146.117 is amended to read:
146.117. (1)(a) A medical examiner or district attorney may order an autopsy performed in any
death requiring investigation.
This authorization for an autopsy shall permit the pathologist to re-
move and retain body tissues or organs from the deceased for the purpose of the legal or medical
determination of the manner or cause of death, or other purposes approved under policies estab-
[3]
SB 1550
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
lished by the State Medical Examiner Advisory Board.
(b) Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this subsection, a medical examiner or district at-
torney shall order the performance of an autopsy in any death upon receipt of a written re-
quest as described in section 3 (2) of this 2026 Act or, if the death appears to be due to
suicide, overdose or accident, upon the occurrence of three or more of the following condi-
tions:
(A) The decedent died prematurely or in an untimely manner.
(B) The scene of death suggests the appearance of death by suicide, overdose or accident.
(C) The decedent was in a romantic relationship in which the decedent or the partner
wanted the relationship to end.
(D) The decedent has a history as a victim of domestic violence, including coercive con-
trol.
(E) The decedent is a minor child with a history as a victim of child abuse, or the subject
of a report of suspected child abuse, within the past 12 months and was found by a parent,
guardian or caregiver who is the perpetrator or alleged perpetrator of such abuse.
(F) The decedent is found dead in a home or place of residence.
(G) The decedent is found by the partner.
(H) The decedent has a history as a victim of domestic violence, including strangulation
or suffocation.
(I) The decedent is last seen alive by the partner, the child of the decedent, the child of
the partner or, if the decedent is a minor child as described in subparagraph (E) of this
paragraph, the child’s parent, guardian or caregiver who was the perpetrator or alleged
perpetrator of such abuse.
(J) The partner had control of the scene of death before law enforcement arrived or, if
the decedent is a minor child as described in subparagraph (E) of this paragraph, the child’s
parent, guardian or caregiver who was the perpetrator or alleged perpetrator of such abuse
had control of the scene of death before law enforcement arrived.
(K) The body of the decedent has been moved from the location where death occurred
or the scene of death or other evidence otherwise appears altered.
(2) If an autopsy is ordered, the medical examiner shall obtain the services of a pathologist au-
thorized under ORS 146.045 (2)(b).
(3) A pathologist may not receive compensation for performing the autopsy if, as medical ex-
aminer, the pathologist ordered the autopsy.
RIGHT TO EXAMINE RECORDS
SECTION 5. ORS 146.035 is amended to read:
146.035. (1) There is established within the Department of State Police the Office of the Chief
Medical Examiner for the purpose of directing and supporting the state death investigation program.
(2) The Chief Medical Examiner shall manage all aspects of the Office of the Chief Medical
Examiner’s program.
(3) Subject to the State Personnel Relations Law, the Chief Medical Examiner may employ or
discharge other personnel of the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner.
(4) The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner shall:
(a) File and maintain appropriate reports on all deaths requiring investigation.
[4]
SB 1550
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
(b) Maintain an accurate list of all active district medical examiners, assistant district medical
examiners and designated pathologists.
(c) Transmit monthly to the Department of Transportation a report for the preceding calendar
month of all information obtained under ORS 146.113.
(5) Notwithstanding ORS 192.345 (36) and 192.355 (2)(b):
(a) Any parent, spouse, sibling, child or personal representative of the deceased, or any person
who may be criminally or civilly liable for the death, or their authorized representatives respec-
tively, may examine and obtain copies of any:
(A) Medical examiner’s report, autopsy report or laboratory test report ordered by a medical
examiner under ORS 146.117.
(B) Photographs, images, negatives, prints or video, including body camera video, of the
body, or any portion of the body, of the deceased generated during an autopsy by a desig-
nated pathologist or investigation by a district medical examiner, assistant district medical
examiner, medical-legal death investigator or employee of a law enforcement agency.
(b)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B) of this paragraph, if a law enforcement
agency or medical examiner finds that the manner of death is not homicide and closes the
case, any parent, spouse, sibling, child or personal representative of the deceased may ex-
amine and obtain without undue delay copies of any evidence or records related to the
deceased’s case in the custody of the law enforcement agency or medical examiner for the
purpose of seeking an independent review of the manner and cause of death.
(B) Subparagraph (A) of this paragraph does not:
(i) Require a law enforcement agency to provide evidence or records if providing such
evidence or records would compromise a pending investigation.
(ii) Affect the lawful discretion provided to a law enforcement agency to carry out in-
vestigations of death.
(iii) Impose any liability on a law enforcement agency in relation to the investigation of
deaths.
(iv) Require a law enforcement agency or other public body to cover the cost of an in-
dependent review of the manner and cause of death.
[(b)] (c) The system described in ORS 192.517 (1) shall have access to reports described in this
subsection as provided in ORS 192.517.
NOTICE OF RIGHTS TO DECEDENT’S FAMILY
SECTION 6. Section 7 of this 2026 Act is added to and made a part of ORS 146.003 to
146.189.
SECTION 7. (1) Upon opening an investigation into the death of a decedent who is sus-
pected to have died from suicide, overdose or accident, a law enforcement agency shall pro-
vide written notice to known members of the decedent’s family of the law and procedure for:
(a) Family members to obtain evidence or records under ORS 146.035.
(b) A medical examiner or district attorney to order an autopsy under ORS 146.117.
(c) A district attorney to order an inquest under ORS 146.135.
(d) A law enforcement agency to determine whether family members of the decedent
must be interviewed under section 3 of this 2026 Act.
(2) If a decedent who is suspected to have died from suicide, overdose or accident has
[5]
SB 1550
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
previously been identified as a victim of domestic violence or actual or suspected child abuse
in police reports, reports made to or by government agencies, writings or photographs, re-
straining order declarations, eyewitness statements or other evidence, a law enforcement
agency shall provide the written notice required under subsection (1) of this section to:
(a) At least one parent, sibling over the age of 18 or other family member of the decedent
who was not the perpetrator or alleged perpetrator of the domestic violence or child abuse;
and
(b) Any family member of the decedent, upon request, who was not the perpetrator or
alleged perpetrator of the domestic violence or child abuse.
APPLICABILITY
SECTION 8. Sections 3 and 7 of this 2026 Act and the amendments to ORS 146.003, 146.035
and 146.117 by sections 1, 4 and 5 of this 2026 Act apply to deaths occurring on or after the
effective date of this 2026 Act.
CAPTIONS
SECTION 9. The unit captions used in this 2026 Act are provided only for the convenience
of the reader and do not become part of the statutory law of this state or express any leg-
islative intent in the enactment of this 2026 Act.
[6]
