1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1564
Sponsored by Senator THATCHER, Representative MUNOZ; Representatives ANDERSEN, MANNIX (Presession
filed.)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: This Act adds land to Woodburn’s UGB. (Flesch Readability Score: 100.0).
Adds specified lands to the City of Woodburn’s urban growth boundary. Requires the city to
designate lands for certain development.
Takes effect on the 91st day following adjournment sine die.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to the City of Woodburn’s urban growth boundary; and prescribing an effective date.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. Section 2 of this 2026 Act is added to and made a part of ORS chapter 197A.
SECTION 2. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, ORS chapter 197, any
statewide land use planning goal or any rule of the Land Conservation and Development
Commission:
(1) The City of Woodburn’s acknowledged urban growth boundary is hereby amended to
add all land:
(a) South of Crosby Road Northeast;
(b) West of Boones Ferry Road Northeast;
(c) North of the city’s existing urban growth boundary; and
(d) East of Marion County Taxlot Number 052W01D00100.
(2) The land added under subsection (1) of this section is hereby added to the City of
Woodburn’s acknowledged comprehensive plan map as “Medium Density Residential” and
“Nodal Development Overlay” as those terms are used in the city’s comprehensive plan op-
erative on the effective date of this 2026 Act.
(3) Marion County shall take all necessary steps to carry out the intent of this section,
including amending its comprehensive plan, and shall cooperate with the city to facilitate the
coordination of functions under ORS 195.020 and the development of the site. Actions taken
under this subsection are not land use decisions as defined in ORS 197.015 and may be chal-
lenged only by writ of review in Marion County Circuit Court.
(4) The city may not approve an application to develop the land described in subsection
(1) of this section until:
(a) The city annexes the land; and
(b) The city adopts and applies to the land a master plan that requires:
(A) No less than 600 residential units; and
(B) A binding agreement between the City of Woodburn and the development applicant
requiring that 30 percent of the residential units in the development are subject to
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 4
SB 1564
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
affordability restrictions, including but not limited to affordable housing covenants, such as
those described in ORS 456.270 to 456.295 that require for a period of not less than 60 years
that the units be:
(i) Available for rent, with or without government assistance, by households with an in-
come of 80 percent or less of the area median income as defined in ORS 456.270; or
(ii) Available for purchase, with or without government assistance, by households with
an income of 130 percent or less of the area median income as defined in ORS 456.270.
SECTION 3. This 2026 Act takes effect on the 91st day after the date on which the 2026
regular session of the Eighty-third Legislative Assembly adjourns sine die.
[2]
