1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1543
Printed pursuant to Senate Interim Rule 213.28 by order of the President of the Senate in conformance with pre-
session filing rules, indicating neither advocacy nor opposition on the part of the President (at the request
of Senate Interim Committee on Transportation)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: The Act makes changes to OTC and tells the OTC to make a policy about how to handle
debt for road projects. The Act says that ODOT may still ask to issue bonds, but first it must let
the OTC know and review the request. (Flesch Readability Score:
82.4).
Modifies membership of the Oregon Transportation Commission.
Directs the commission to develop a debt financing management policy for all forms of debt fi-
nancing issued to finance highway projects.
Provides that before the Department of Transportation may request the State Treasurer to issue
bonds, the department must first submit the proposed request to the Oregon Transportation Com-
mission for review.
Declares an emergency, effective on passage.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to transportation; creating new provisions; amending ORS 184.612, 184.649, 184.661, 367.025,
367.030, 367.163, 367.555, 367.615, 367.812, 383.200 and 391.140; and declaring an emergency.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. ORS 184.612 is amended to read:
184.612. [(1) There is established the Oregon Transportation Commission consisting of five members
appointed by the Governor, subject to confirmation by the Senate pursuant to Article III, section 4, of
the Oregon Constitution. A member serves at the pleasure of the Governor.]
(1) There is established the Oregon Transportation Commission consisting of seven
members. The Governor shall appoint five voting members who are subject to confirmation
by the Senate pursuant to Article III, section 4, of the Oregon Constitution.
The President
of the Senate shall appoint one state Senator as a nonvoting member. The Speaker of the
House of Representatives shall appoint one state Representative as a nonvoting member.
Members serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority.
(2) The Governor shall appoint the voting members of the commission in compliance with all
of the following:
[(a) Members shall be appointed with consideration of the different geographic regions of the state
with one member being a resident of the area east of the Cascade Range.]
(a) Members shall include a representative from each of the state’s five transportation
regions, as described in ORS 366.805.
(b) Not more than three members [who] may belong to one political party. Party affiliation shall
be determined by the appropriate entry on official election registration cards.
(c) At least one member must be an individual whose primary method of travel is by
means other than a motor vehicle.
(3) At the time of appointment, a member or a relative or member of the household of a member,
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 271
SB 1543
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
as those terms are defined in ORS 244.020, may not have an actual conflict of interest, as defined
in ORS 244.020.
(4) Notwithstanding ORS 244.120 (2), when met with a potential or actual conflict of interest,
as those terms are defined in ORS 244.020, a member shall announce publicly the nature of the po-
tential or actual conflict and:
(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this subsection, refrain from participating as a public
official in any discussion or debate on the issue out of which the potential or actual conflict arises
or from voting on the issue.
(b) If the member’s vote is necessary to meet a requirement of a minimum number of votes to
take official action, be eligible to vote, but not to participate as a public official in any discussion
or debate on the issue out of which the potential or actual conflict arises.
(5) The term of office of each member is four years or until the end of a legislative member’s
legislative term, whichever occurs first. Before the expiration of the term of a member, the
[Governor] appointing authority shall appoint a successor whose term begins on July 1 next fol-
lowing. A member is eligible for reappointment. In case of a vacancy for any cause, the [Governor]
appointing authority shall appoint a person to fill the office for the unexpired term. A person
may not serve more than two full terms as a member of the commission.
(6) The Governor shall appoint one of the voting members as chairperson. The chairperson shall
appoint one of the other members as vice chairperson. The chairperson and vice chairperson shall
have such terms, duties and powers as the Oregon Transportation Commission determines are nec-
essary for the performance of such offices.
(7) A majority of the voting members of the commission constitutes a quorum. If a quorum is
present at a meeting, the commission may take action by an affirmative vote by a majority of the
voting members who are present. An individual member may not exercise individually any admin-
istrative authority with respect to the Department of Transportation.
(8) The commission shall meet at least quarterly, at a time and place determined by the voting
members of the commission. The commission shall also meet at such other times and places as are
specified by the call of the chairperson or of a majority of the voting members of the commission.
(9) A vacancy does not impair the right of the remaining voting members to exercise all the
powers of the commission, except that three voting members of the commission must agree in the
selection, vacation or abandonment of state highways, and in case the voting members are unable
to agree the Governor shall have the right to vote as a member of the commission.
(10) The commission shall keep complete and accurate records of all the meetings, transactions
and business of the commission at the office of the department.
(11) The commission may provide an official seal.
(12) The commission may hire staff the commission deems necessary to assist the commission in
carrying out its duties. The staff shall be considered employees of the department for purposes of
the State Personnel Relations Law under ORS chapter 240.
(13) A voting member of the commission is entitled to compensation and expenses as provided
by ORS 292.495. Any legislative members are entitled to payment of compensation and ex-
pense reimbursement under ORS 171.072, payable from funds appropriated to the Legislative
Assembly.
SECTION 2. (1) On June 30, 2027, the term of office of members of the Oregon Trans-
portation Commission then holding office shall cease. A member whose term of office has
been terminated by this subsection is eligible for reappointment to the Oregon Transporta-
[2]
SB 1543
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
tion Commission.
(2) Notwithstanding the term of office specified by ORS 184.612, of the members whose
terms begin on July 1, 2027:
(a) One shall serve for a term ending June 30, 2028.
(b) Two shall serve for a term ending June 30, 2029.
(c) Two shall serve for a term ending June 30, 2030.
(d) Two shall serve for a term ending June 30, 2031.
SECTION 3. Section 2 of this 2026 Act is repealed on January 2, 2032.
SECTION 4. Sections 2 and 3 of this 2026 Act and the amendments to ORS 184.612 by
section 1 of this 2026 Act become operative on January 1, 2027.
SECTION 5. The amendments to ORS 184.612 by section 1 of this 2026 Act apply to ap-
pointments made on or after the effective date of this 2026 Act.
SECTION 6. Highway debt financing management policy. (1) In consultation with the
State Treasurer, the Oregon Transportation Commission shall develop a debt financing
management policy for all forms of debt financing issued to finance highway projects, in-
cluding, but not limited to, bonds, federal advanced construction funds, and other forms of
financing based on debt or future repayment.
(2) The policy must be used by the commission and the State Treasurer to guide
decision-making related to debt financing. The commission may update the policy as neces-
sary. In developing and updating the policy, in addition to consulting with the State Treas-
urer, the commission shall consult with the chairpersons and vice chairpersons of the
committees and interim committees of the Legislative Assembly related to transportation.
(3) The debt financing management policy developed under this section must address
relevant financial issues, including, but not limited to:
(a) Limits on cumulative amounts of debt for the highway system from all state and
federal sources;
(b) Eligibility of highway projects for proceeds from debt financing;
(c) Allocation and use of proceeds;
(d) Terms of debt service and methods of repayment;
(e) Management of the State Highway Fund; and
(f) Mitigation of risks from different forms of debt financing.
(4) The debt financing management policy must ensure that annual debt service for
highway projects, excluding debt service anticipated to be paid from federal grant moneys,
does not exceed 20 percent of annual state transportation resources to the State Highway
Fund.
(5) No later than January 31 of each odd-number year, the commission shall review and
update the debt financing management policy and submit a report to the standing or interim
committees of the Legislative Assembly related to transportation, in the manner provided in
ORS 192.245, on the policy and any changes to the policy.
SECTION 7. Requesting issuance of bonds. (1) Before the Department of Transportation
may request the State Treasurer to issue bonds, the department must first submit the pro-
posed request to the Oregon Transportation Commission for review. In conducting the re-
view, the commission shall provide notice and the opportunity for public comment on
whether the commission should approve the request. After reviewing the request, the com-
mission may approve, modify or deny the request in accordance with the debt financing
[3]
SB 1543
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
management policy adopted under section 6 of this 2026 Act. The department may not make
a bond request to the State Treasurer, and the State Treasurer may not act on a bonding
request, unless the request is first approved by the commission.
(2) If the proposed request is for issuance of bonds that will produce at least $10 million
in net proceeds, the department shall create a report on the proposed debt. The department
shall submit the report to the commission at the time the department submits the proposed
request for review. Additionally, the department shall submit the report to the committees
or interim committees of the Legislative Assembly related to transportation.
The report
must include at least the following information:
(a) A full debt repayment schedule;
(b) An accounting of the total cost of the debt, including all financing-related costs;
(c) A description of how bond proceeds will be used and how the debt is to be secured;
(d) A description of the specific revenues that will be used to pay debt service, an esti-
mate of the total annual amounts of those revenues and the share of those revenues cur-
rently dedicated to debt service; and
(e) An analysis of opportunity costs, including next-best uses of moneys and projected
impacts of the proposed bonds on future funding for other projects, for at least two biennia
after the current biennium.
(3) The commission may not approve a proposed bonding request, and the State Treas-
urer may not act on a bonding request, if the department is not in compliance with sub-
section (2) of this section.
SECTION 8. ORS 367.025 is amended to read:
367.025. (1) If the Department of Transportation determines that it is necessary or desirable to
issue infrastructure bonds to provide moneys for the Oregon Transportation Infrastructure Fund, the
department shall ask the State Treasurer to issue infrastructure bonds, subject to section 7 of this
2026 Act.
(2) Infrastructure bonds shall be issued as provided in ORS chapter 286A.
SECTION 9. ORS 367.030 is amended to read:
367.030. (1) To provide moneys for the Oregon Transportation Infrastructure Fund or to refund
bonds authorized by this section, the State Treasurer may, at the request of the Department of
Transportation and subject to section 7 of this 2026 Act, issue revenue bonds of the State of
Oregon that are payable solely from all or any portion of the moneys deposited in the infrastructure
fund and may pledge such moneys to secure the revenue bonds. The department or State Treasurer
may exercise any power granted by ORS chapter 286A in connection with bonds authorized by this
section. However, the State Treasurer or the department shall not pledge or encumber any moneys
of the State of Oregon other than those required by ORS 367.010 to 367.067 to be deposited in the
infrastructure fund.
(2) The department may enter into covenants for the benefit of the owners of bonds authorized
by this section regarding the use of moneys in the infrastructure fund, the providing of
infrastructure assistance and the collection of infrastructure loans. Any such covenants shall be
binding upon the State of Oregon in accordance with their terms and shall be enforceable against
the State of Oregon by owners of the bonds. However, no owner of bonds authorized by this section
shall ever have the right to compel any exercise of the taxing power of the state to pay any such
bonds or the interest thereon, or to enforce payment thereof against any property of the state, ex-
cept those moneys in the infrastructure fund that are pledged to pay the bonds and any moneys the
[4]
SB 1543
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
department or an agency may agree to use to repay infrastructure loans under ORS 367.040. Bonds
authorized by this section shall not constitute a charge, lien or encumbrance, legal or equitable,
upon any property of the state, except moneys in the infrastructure fund that are pledged to pay the
bonds, and any property that the department or agency pledges, mortgages or assigns to secure
infrastructure loans pursuant to ORS 367.040.
Revenue bonds authorized by this section shall not
constitute a debt of the state or a lending of the credit of the state within the meaning of any
constitutional or statutory limitation.
(3) The total principal amount of revenue bonds that are issued under this section and out-
standing at any time shall not exceed $200 million.
SECTION 10. ORS 367.163 is amended to read:
367.163. The State Treasurer, at the request of the Department of Transportation and subject
to section 7 of this 2026 Act, may issue grant anticipation revenue bonds for the purposes of:
(1) Financing highway improvement projects including highway improvement projects already
under way or scheduled;
(2) Financing the restoration, reconstruction or renovation of highway improvements in Oregon;
(3) Financing transportation projects;
(4) Paying the costs of issuance of the revenue bonds including, but not limited to, the costs and
fees of paying agents, trustees and remarketing agents;
(5) Paying the costs of credit enhancements; or
(6) Financing the Interstate 5 bridge replacement project.
SECTION 11. ORS 367.555 is amended to read:
367.555. (1) Subject to section 7 of this 2026 Act, The Department of Transportation may re-
quest the State Treasurer to issue general obligation bonds of the State of Oregon used to provide
funds to defray the costs of building and maintaining permanent roads, including the costs of lo-
cation, relocation, improvement, construction and reconstruction of state highways and bridges and
those portions of a tollway project, as defined in ORS 383.003, that constitute building or maintain-
ing permanent roads.
(2) The principal amount of any bonds issued under this section is subject to the provisions of
ORS 286A.035.
SECTION 12. ORS 367.615 is amended to read:
367.615. (1) Subject to section 7 of this 2026 Act, The Department of Transportation may re-
quest the State Treasurer to issue and sell revenue bonds known as Highway User Tax Bonds as
provided in this section.
(2) Bonds issued under this section do not constitute a debt or general obligation of this state
or any political subdivision of this state but are secured and payable from moneys described under
ORS 367.605. A holder of bonds issued under this section may not compel the exercise of the ad
valorem taxing power of the state to pay the bond debt service on the bonds.
(3) This state shall provide for the continued assessment, levy, collection and deposit into the
highway fund of moneys described under ORS 367.605 in amounts sufficient to pay, when due, the
annual bond debt service and other amounts necessary to meet requirements established by
indenture under ORS 367.640.
(4) This state may not in any way impair obligations of any agreement between this state and
the holders of bonds issued under this section.
(5) The authority granted by this section is continuing and the department reserves the right
to request the State Treasurer to issue additional bonds under this section subject to the following:
[5]
SB 1543
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
(a) Additional bonds must be secured equally and ratably by the pledge and appropriation of
moneys described under ORS 367.605 unless the State Treasurer, as permitted by law and the con-
tracts with owners of outstanding Highway User Tax Bonds, issues additional bonds in different
series and secures each series by a lien on and pledge of moneys described under ORS 367.605 that
is superior to or subordinate to the lien of the pledge securing any other series of Highway User
Tax Bonds.
(b) The State Treasurer may only issue additional bonds under this section if sufficient moneys
described under ORS 367.605 may be pledged to pay the annual bond debt service for all outstanding
bonds issued under this section as well as for the additional bonds.
(6) Proceeds from the sale of bonds under this section are declared to be for the purpose of
building and maintaining permanent public roads and may be used:
(a) To finance the cost of state highway, county road and city street projects in this state.
(b) To pay the cost of issuing the bonds.
(c) For loans to cities and counties as provided under ORS 367.035 or 367.655.
(d) To pay the bond debt service of the bonds.
(e) To pay the costs of the State Treasurer and the department to administer and maintain the
bonds and the Highway User Tax Bond program, including the cost of consultants, advisors, attor-
neys or other professional service providers appointed, retained or approved by the treasurer or the
department.
(f) To pay capitalized interest, principal or premium, if any, of the bonds.
(g) For rebates or penalties due to the United States in connection with the bonds.
(7) The State Treasurer, at the request of the department, may issue Highway User Tax Bonds
as capital appreciation bonds, auction rate bonds, variable rate bonds, deep discount bonds or de-
ferred interest bonds.
(8) The State Treasurer or the Director of Transportation, if so directed by the treasurer, may
obtain credit enhancement or an agreement for exchange of interest rates to provide additional se-
curity or liquidity for the bonds or to provide funding, in lieu of cash, for all or a portion of a bond
debt service reserve account established with respect to the bonds.
SECTION 13. ORS 367.812 is amended to read:
367.812. (1) In addition to any authority to issue and sell bonds and other similar obligations,
this section establishes continuing authority for the State Treasurer to issue and sell bonds and
other similar obligations, at the request of the Department of Transportation, in a manner consistent
with this section. To finance any transportation project in whole or in part, the department may
request that the State Treasurer issue revenue bonds on behalf of the department, subject to sec-
tion 7 of this 2026 Act. Revenue bonds authorized under this section shall be issued in accordance
with the applicable provisions of ORS chapter 286A. The bonds shall be secured by a pledge of, and
a lien on, and shall be payable only from moneys in the State Transportation Enterprise Fund es-
tablished by ORS 367.810 and any other revenues specifically pledged to repayment of the bonds.
Such a pledge by the department of its revenues creates a lien that is valid and binding from the
time the pledge is made as provided in ORS 286A.102. Revenue bonds issued pursuant to this section
are not general obligations of the state and are not secured by or payable from any funds or assets
of the state other than the moneys and revenues specifically pledged to the repayment of such re-
venue bonds.
(2) Moneys received from the issuance of revenue bonds or other debt obligations, including any
investment earnings thereon, may be expended:
[6]
SB 1543
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
(a) For the purpose of financing the costs of the transportation project for which the bonds are
issued;
(b) To pay the costs and other administrative expenses of the bonds;
(c) To pay the costs of credit enhancement or to fund any reserves determined to be necessary
or advantageous in connection with the revenue bonds; and
(d) To reimburse the department for any costs related to carrying out the purposes of the pro-
gram established under ORS 367.804.
(3) Any transportation project may be financed in whole or in part with:
(a) The proceeds of grant anticipation revenue bonds authorized by 23 U.S.C. 122 and applicable
state law.
(b) Grants, loans, loan guarantees, lines of credit, revolving lines of credit or other financing
arrangements available pursuant to the Transportation Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act
under 23 U.S.C. 181 et seq., or any other applicable federal law.
(c) Infrastructure loans or assistance from the Oregon Transportation Infrastructure Fund es-
tablished by ORS 367.015.
(4) As security for the payment of financing described in subsection (3) of this section, the re-
venues from the project may be pledged, but no such pledge of revenues constitutes in any manner
or to any extent a general obligation of the state. Any financing described in subsection (3) of this
section may be structured on a senior, parity or subordinate basis to any other financing.
SECTION 14. ORS 383.200 is amended to read:
383.200. (1) In accordance with the applicable provisions of ORS chapter 286A and subject to
section 7 of this 2026 Act, the State Treasurer, at the request of the Department of Transportation,
may issue and sell revenue bonds known as tollway project revenue bonds for the purpose of fi-
nancing tollway projects authorized by the Oregon Transportation Commission or the Department
of Transportation, provided that such bonds do not constitute a debt or general obligation of the
department or of this state or any of its political subdivisions, but shall be payable solely from the
revenues, amounts, funds and accounts described in ORS 383.009, 383.205 and 383.235.
(2) The proceeds of bonds issued under this section may be used by the department or loaned
or granted to a private entity or a local government, as defined in ORS 174.116, for the purposes
of:
(a) Financing any portion of the costs related to the purposes described in ORS 383.009 (2);
(b) Funding any required reserves;
(c) Paying costs of issuing the bonds; and
(d) Reimbursing the department for any eligible costs associated with the establishment, over-
sight, operation and maintenance of a tollway or a tollway project.
(3) The bonds authorized by this section may be issued as taxable bonds or as tax-exempt bonds
under the income tax laws of the United States.
(4) Notwithstanding the status of the bonds for federal income tax purposes, interest paid to the
owners of the bonds shall be exempt from personal income taxes imposed by this state.
(5) Subject to the limitations under ORS 383.004 and 383.009, when issuing bonds under this
section, the department and the State Treasurer may make covenants with bondholders regarding
the imposition and regulation of tolls to meet the department’s obligations under the terms of any
indenture prepared under ORS 383.225, any loan agreement and any grant agreement, including
without limitation:
(a) Financial covenants, debt service requirements, reserve requirements and any other funding
[7]
SB 1543
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
requirements;
(b) The use of the amounts required to be deposited in the Toll Program Fund; and
(c) The issuance of additional bonds.
(6) The state may not in any way impair obligations of any agreement between the state and
holders of tollway project revenue bonds issued under this section.
(7) The department, with the approval of the State Treasurer, may designate the extent to which
a series of tollway project revenue bonds authorized under this section is secured and payable:
(a) On a parity of lien or on a subordinate basis to existing or future Highway User Tax Bonds
issued under ORS 367.615, but only if sufficient moneys described under ORS 367.605 may be pledged
to:
(A) First, pay the annual bond debt service of all Highway User Tax Bonds issued pursuant to
ORS 367.615 and 367.620; and
(B) Second, pay the annual bond debt service for all tollway project revenue bonds issued under
this subsection; or
(b) From additional revenue sources as permitted under ORS 383.205.
(8) A holder of tollway project revenue bonds issued under this section may not compel the
payment of federal transportation funds to the department.
(9) This section is supplemental and in addition to any other authority in ORS chapters 286A,
366 and 367 for the issuance of bonds by the State Treasurer at the request of the department.
SECTION 15. ORS 391.140 is amended to read:
391.140. (1) In accordance with ORS chapter 286A, the State Treasurer, at the request of the
Director of Transportation and subject to section 7 of this 2026 Act, shall issue revenue bonds
from time to time in an aggregate amount not to exceed:
(a) The principal sum of $115 million;
(b) The costs incurred in connection with the issuance of the bonds and other administrative
expenses of the State Treasurer in connection with the issuance of the bonds; and
(c) The amount of any reserves determined to be necessary or advantageous in connection with
the revenue bonds.
(2) The Director of Transportation shall submit to the State Treasurer from time to time written
requests to issue the revenue bonds in amounts sufficient to provide in a timely fashion the moneys
required to fund the obligations of the Department of Transportation under any written agreements
or commitments entered into under ORS 391.120 (2) for the purpose of financing the state share of
the costs of the Westside corridor light rail project identified in ORS 391.120 (2)(a).
(3) Moneys received from the issuance of revenue bonds, including any investment earnings
thereon, may be expended only for the purpose of financing the costs of development, acquisition
and construction of the Westside corridor light rail project identified in ORS 391.120 (2)(a), and to
pay the costs of issuing the bonds and other administrative expenses of the State Treasurer in car-
rying out the provisions of ORS 391.120 and this section, including the funding of any reserves de-
termined to be necessary or advantageous in connection with the revenue bonds.
(4) Notwithstanding ORS 286A.100, 286A.102 and 286A.120 or any other provision of law, re-
venue bonds issued under this section, regardless of whether issued in one or more issues, shall be
secured equally and ratably by the pledge of moneys described in this subsection and ORS 391.130.
The bonds shall be secured by a pledge of, and a lien on, and shall be secured and payable only from,
moneys on deposit from time to time in the Regional Light Rail Extension Construction Fund es-
tablished by ORS 391.120. The revenue bonds shall not be a general obligation of this state, and
[8]
SB 1543
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
shall not be secured by or payable from any funds or assets of this state other than the moneys on
deposit from time to time in the Regional Light Rail Extension Construction Fund.
(5) The moneys in the Regional Light Rail Extension Bond Account shall be used and applied
by the Director of Transportation to pay when due the principal of and interest on any revenue
bonds issued under this section.
(6) The interest on all revenue bonds issued under this section and on any refunding bonds is-
sued pursuant to ORS chapter 286A is exempt from personal income taxation imposed by this state
under ORS chapter 316.
(7) The proceeds derived from the issuance and sale of the revenue bonds, including any pro-
ceeds required to fund any reserves determined to be necessary or advantageous in connection with
the revenue bonds, shall be deposited in a special, segregated subaccount of the Regional Light Rail
Extension Construction Fund. The moneys on deposit from time to time in the subaccount, including
any investment earnings thereon, shall be disbursed as needed for the purposes described in sub-
section (3) of this section upon the written request of the Director of Transportation.
SECTION 16. Updating bylaws. (1) No later than January 1, 2027, the Oregon Transpor-
tation Commission shall conduct a review and amend its bylaws.
(2) The bylaws of the commission must include:
(a) A requirement that an electronic mail address for each voting member of the com-
mission be published on the commission’s website; and
(b) A process for ensuring that meeting materials for forthcoming decisions by the
commission are published with reasonable notice prior to public comment deadlines to allow
for review and engagement by the public on matters that may impact the public.
(3) No later than September 15, 2027, the commission shall submit to the committees or
interim committees of the Legislative Assembly related to transportation a report on the
changes made during the review and amendment of its bylaws.
SECTION 17. Section 16 of this 2026 Act is repealed on January 2, 2028.
SECTION 18. ORS 184.649 is amended to read:
184.649. [The Oregon Transportation Commission shall report on audits of the Department of
Transportation to the Joint Legislative Audit Committee established by ORS 171.580 and to the Joint
Committee on Transportation established by ORS 171.858 at least once each biennium.] No later than
January 31 of each odd-numbered year, the Oregon Transportation Commission shall submit
a report on:
(1) Audits of the Department of Transportation to the Joint Legislative Audit Committee
established by ORS 171.580 and to the committees or interim committees of the Legislative
Assembly related to transportation; and
(2) Projects financed by debt issuance, including the debt type and repayment source, to
the committees or interim committees of the Legislative Assembly related to transportation.
SECTION 19. ORS 184.661 is amended to read:
184.661. (1) The Oregon Transportation Commission, through the Department of Transportation,
shall develop a website.
(2) The website must include:
(a) A list of all transportation projects in the Statewide Transportation Improvement Program
and for each project the website must include:
(A) A description of the project and the project benefits;
(B) The estimated cost and estimated completion date;
[9]
SB 1543
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
(C) Updated information about the projects as they proceed, including the actual amount spent
to date on the project and the amount estimated to complete the project; and
(D) After a project is completed, updated information, including the amount a project is under
or over the original estimated cost and whether a project was completed by the original estimated
completion date.
(b) Information on the reports required under ORS 366.774 and 366.790 for all cities with a
population of 5,000 or greater and all counties in the state, including the amount of transportation
funds collected by each county and city and the source of the funds and the amount of money spent
on transportation projects by type of expenditure as listed in ORS 366.774 (2) and 366.790 (2).
This
information shall be displayed for the most current six-year period.
(c) Information on the condition of Oregon’s transportation infrastructure, as required under
ORS 184.657.
(d) Information about the results the audits performed pursuant to ORS 184.639.
(e) Links to all available county and city transportation project websites.
(f) Links to websites about transportation projects receiving moneys from the Connect Oregon
Fund.
SECTION 20. The section captions used in this 2026 Act are provided only for the con-
venience of the reader and do not become part of the statutory law of this state or express
any legislative intent in the enactment of this 2026 Act.
SECTION 21. This 2026 Act being necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
peace, health and safety, an emergency is declared to exist, and this 2026 Act takes effect
on its passage.
[10]
