1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1544
Printed pursuant to Senate Interim Rule 213.28 by order of the President of the Senate in conformance with pre-
session filing rules, indicating neither advocacy nor opposition on the part of the President (at the request
of Senate Interim Committee on Transportation)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: The Act says that ODOT must study speed bumps.
(Flesch Readability Score: 94.3).
Requires the Department of Transportation to study the development of uniform standards for
speed bump height and markings.
Sunsets January 2, 2028.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to transportation.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. (1) The Department of Transportation shall conduct a study of speed bumps
to examine the possibility of developing uniform standards for speed bump height and speed
bump markings and shall make a report on its findings.
(2) The department shall submit the report required by subsection (1) of this section, and
may include recommendations for legislation, to the interim committees of the Legislative
Assembly related to transportation in the manner provided under ORS 192.245 no later than
September 15, 2027.
SECTION 2. Section 1 of this 2026 Act is repealed on January 2, 2028.
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 279
