1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1533
Printed pursuant to Senate Interim Rule 213.28 by order of the President of the Senate in conformance with pre-
session filing rules, indicating neither advocacy nor opposition on the part of the President (at the request
of Senate Interim Committee on Human Services)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: The Act makes changes to the Oregon Foster Children’s Bill of Rights and the Oregon
Foster Children’s Sibling Bill of Rights.
The Act excludes a child’s parents from some laws about abuse of a child in care and requires
DHS to tell some people that a DHS employee cannot give legal advice to them. (Flesch Readability
Score: 65.0).
Modifies the Oregon Foster Children’s Bill of Rights and the Oregon Foster Children’s Sibling
Bill of Rights.
Creates an exception to abuse of a child in care provisions when the suspected abuse was
committed by the parent of the child in care.
Requires the Department of Human Services to notify a child’s parents or guardians that the
department representative is acting on behalf of the department and cannot give the parent or
guardian legal advice.
Declares an emergency, effective on passage.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to the rights of children in care; creating new provisions; amending ORS 409.185, 418.200,
418.201, 418.257 and 418.607; and declaring an emergency.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
FOSTER CHILDREN
SECTION 1. The court, on its own motion or upon the motion of a party in the pro-
ceeding, and after any hearing as the court may direct, may enter an order limiting, denying
or prohibiting contact between a foster child and the foster child’s sibling to the extent
necessary to ensure safe and appropriate contact between the foster child and the foster
child’s sibling. If the court issues an order under this section, the court shall make written
findings of fact in support of the order.
SECTION 2. ORS 418.200 is amended to read:
418.200. As used in ORS 418.200 to 418.202, “foster child” means a child who is in the legal or
physical custody of the Department of Human Services pursuant to the provisions of ORS chapter
418, 419B or 419C and who is or was placed or who is awaiting placement in substitute care with
a foster parent, a child-caring agency as defined in ORS 418.205 or an independent residence facility
established, licensed, certified or authorized by the department under ORS 418.475.
SECTION 3. ORS 418.201 is amended to read:
418.201. It is the intent of the Legislative Assembly that each foster child have certain essential
rights, including but not limited to the following:
(1) To have the ability to make oral and written complaints about care, placement or services
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 68
SB 1533
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
that are unsatisfactory or inappropriate, and to be provided with information about a formal process
for making complaints without fear of retaliation, harassment or punishment.
(2) To be notified of, and provided with transportation to, court hearings and reviews by local
citizen review boards pertaining to the foster child’s case. [when the matters to be considered or de-
cided upon at the hearings and reviews are appropriate for the foster child, taking into account the age
and developmental stage of the foster child.]
(3) To be provided with written contact information of specific individuals whom the foster child
may contact regarding complaints, concerns or violations of rights, that is updated as necessary and
kept current.
(4) To be protected from abuse, exploitation, neglect, intimidation, retaliation and
wrongful use of restraint or seclusion.
(5) To regularly attend school and to have access to a free and appropriate public edu-
cation.
(6) To be assigned an attorney to represent the foster child’s interests and to have un-
impeded and unmonitored contact with that attorney.
(7) To have unimpeded and unmonitored contact, as applicable, with the Residential Fa-
cilities Ombudsman, the Children’s Advocate or a foster care ombudsman who has been
formally designated by the Children’s Advocate or the Department of Human Services.
(8) To have an attorney or court-appointed advocate of the foster child’s choosing present
for any interview with law enforcement or abuse investigators, regardless of whether the
foster child is interviewed as a witness, a victim or a subject individual.
(9) To maintain and have access to personal belongings including but not limited to
clothing, books, toys, photographs and musical instruments.
(10) To be present at court hearings, including to be present at all court hearings re-
garding the child’s case.
(11) To transport belongings and personal effects in an appropriate luggage carrier when
entering into or transitioning or exiting from foster care.
[(4)] (12) When a foster child is 14 years of age or older, to be provided with written information
within 60 days of the date of any placement or any change in placement, regarding:
(a) How to establish a bank account in the foster child’s name as allowed under state law;
(b) How to acquire a driver license as allowed under state law;
(c) How to remain in foster care after reaching 18 years of age;
(d) The availability of a tuition and fee waiver for a current or former foster child under ORS
350.300;
(e) How to obtain a copy of the foster child’s credit report, if any;
(f) How to obtain medical, dental, vision, mental health services or other treatment, including
services and treatments available without parental consent under state law; and
(g) A transition toolkit, including a comprehensive transition plan.
[(5)] (13) With respect to a foster child’s rights under the federal and state constitutions, laws,
including case law, rules and regulations:
(a) To receive a document setting forth such rights that is age-appropriate and developmentally
appropriate within [60] seven days of the date of any placement or any change in placement;
(b) To have a document setting forth such rights that is age-appropriate and developmentally
appropriate posted at the residences of all foster parents, child-caring agencies and independent
resident facilities;
[2]
SB 1533
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
(c) To have an annual review of such rights that is age-appropriate and developmentally appro-
priate while the foster child is in substitute care; and
(d) When the foster child is 14 years of age or older:
(A) To receive a document setting forth such rights that is age-appropriate and developmentally
appropriate; and
(B) To acknowledge in writing receipt of the document and that the rights contained in the
document were explained in an age-appropriate manner.
[(6)] (14) To be provided with current and updated contact information for adults who are re-
sponsible for the care of the foster child and who are involved in the foster child’s case, including
but not limited to caseworkers, caseworker supervisors, attorneys, foster youth advocates and sup-
porters, court appointed special advocates, local citizen review boards and employees of the De-
partment of Human Services that provide certification of foster parents, child-caring agencies and
independent resident facilities.
[(7)] (15) To have a hotline phone number that is available to the foster child at all times for
the purposes of enabling the foster child to make complaints and assert grievances regarding the
foster child’s care, safety or well-being.
SECTION 4. ORS 418.257 is amended to read:
418.257. As used in ORS 418.257 to 418.259:
(1) “Abuse” means one or more of the following:
(a) Any physical injury to a child in care caused by other than accidental means, or that appears
to be at variance with the explanation given of the injury.
(b) Neglect of a child in care.
(c) Abandonment, including desertion or willful forsaking of a child in care or the withdrawal
or neglect of duties and obligations owed a child in care by a child-caring agency, caretaker, certi-
fied foster home, developmental disabilities residential facility or other person.
(d) Willful infliction of physical pain or injury upon a child in care.
(e) An act that constitutes a crime under ORS 163.375, 163.405, 163.411, 163.415, 163.425, 163.427,
163.465, 163.467 or 163.525.
(f) Verbal abuse.
(g) Financial exploitation.
(h) Sexual abuse.
(i) The use of restraint or involuntary seclusion of a child in care in violation of ORS 418.521
or 418.523.
(2) “Certified foster home” means a foster home certified by the Department of Human Services
and subject to ORS 418.625 to 418.645.
(3)(a) “Child in care” means a person under 21 years of age who is in the physical or legal
custody of the department or who is residing in or receiving care or services from:
(A) A child-caring agency or proctor foster home subject to ORS 418.205 to 418.327, 418.470,
418.475 or 418.950 to 418.970;
(B) A certified foster home; or
(C) A developmental disabilities residential facility.
(b) “Child in care” does not include a person under 21 years of age who is residing in any of
the entities listed in paragraph (a) of this subsection when the care provided is in the home of the
child by the child’s parent.
(4) “Developmental disabilities residential facility” means a residential facility or foster home
[3]
SB 1533
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
for children who are 17 years of age or younger and receiving developmental disability services that
is subject to ORS 443.400 to 443.455, 443.830 and 443.835.
(5)(a) “Financial exploitation” means:
(A) Wrongfully taking the assets, funds or property belonging to or intended for the use of a
child in care.
(B) Alarming a child in care by conveying a threat to wrongfully take or appropriate moneys
or property of the child in care if the child would reasonably believe that the threat conveyed would
be carried out.
(C) Misappropriating, misusing or transferring without authorization any moneys from any ac-
count held jointly or singly by a child in care.
(D) Failing to use the income or assets of a child in care effectively for the support and main-
tenance of the child in care.
(b) “Financial exploitation” does not include age-appropriate discipline that may involve the
threat to withhold, or the withholding of, privileges.
(6) “Intimidation” means compelling or deterring conduct by threat. “Intimidation” does not in-
clude age-appropriate discipline that may involve the threat to withhold privileges.
(7) “Involuntary seclusion” has the meaning given that term in ORS 418.519.
(8) “Law enforcement agency” means:
(a) Any city or municipal police department.
(b) Any county sheriff’s office.
(c) The Oregon State Police.
(d) Any district attorney.
(e) A police department established by a university under ORS 352.121 or 353.125.
(9) “Neglect” means:
(a) Failure to provide the care, supervision or services necessary to maintain the physical and
mental health of a child in care; or
(b) The failure of a child-caring agency, proctor foster home, certified foster home, develop-
mental disabilities residential facility, caretaker or other person to make a reasonable effort to
protect a child in care from abuse.
(10) “Restraint” has the meaning given that term in ORS 418.519.
(11) “Services” includes but is not limited to the provision of food, clothing, medicine, housing,
medical services, assistance with bathing or personal hygiene or any other service essential to the
well-being of a child in care.
(12) “Sexual abuse” means:
(a) Sexual harassment, sexual exploitation or inappropriate exposure to sexually explicit mate-
rial or language;
(b) Any sexual contact between a child in care and an employee of a child-caring agency,
proctor foster home, certified foster home, developmental disabilities residential facility, caretaker
or other person responsible for the provision of care or services to a child in care;
(c) Any sexual contact between a person and a child in care that is unlawful under ORS chapter
163 and not subject to a defense under that chapter; or
(d) Any sexual contact that is achieved through force, trickery, threat or coercion.
(13) “Sexual contact” has the meaning given that term in ORS 163.305.
(14) “Sexual exploitation” means sexual exploitation as described in ORS 419B.005 (1)(a)(E).
(15) “Verbal abuse” means to threaten significant physical or emotional harm to a child in care
[4]
SB 1533
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
through the use of:
(a) Derogatory or inappropriate names, insults, verbal assaults, profanity or ridicule; or
(b) Harassment, coercion, threats, intimidation, humiliation, mental cruelty or inappropriate
sexual comments.
SECTION 5. ORS 418.607 is amended to read:
418.607. It is the intent of the Legislative Assembly that siblings who are foster children have
certain essential rights, including but not limited to the following:
(1) To obtain substitute care placements together whenever safe and appropriate.
(2) To maintain regular contact and visits with siblings while placed both in and out of substi-
tute care placements, including regular in-person visits, contact by telephone and electronic
communication[, as safe and appropriate], except as limited, denied or prohibited by court order
under section 1 of this 2026 Act.
(3) To be provided with transportation to maintain contact and have visits with siblings.
(4) To be placed with foster parents and assigned caseworkers who have been provided with
training on the importance of sibling relationships.
(5) [To ensure that contact with siblings will be encouraged in any adoptive or guardianship
placement, as safe and appropriate.] To ensure that contact with siblings will be regularly
maintained, encouraged and facilitated in any adoptive or guardianship placement, except as
limited, denied or prohibited by court order under section 1 of this 2026 Act.
(6) To have a sibling contact plan that has been developed as a result of the active engagement
and participation of siblings and that is complied with as part of any substitute care placement.
(7) [To have more private or less restrictive communication with siblings as compared to commu-
nications with others who are not siblings, as safe and appropriate.] To have private and unre-
stricted communication with siblings except as limited, denied or prohibited by court order
under section 1 of this 2026 Act.
(8) To be immediately and timely notified of the birth of a sibling or placement changes or
catastrophic events affecting a sibling, [as safe and appropriate] in a developmentally appropriate
and trauma-responsive manner.
(9) With respect to a foster child’s rights under this section:
(a) To receive a document setting forth such rights as is age-appropriate and developmentally
appropriate within [60] seven days of the date of any placement or any change in placement;
(b) To have a document setting forth such rights that is age-appropriate and developmentally
appropriate on each occasion that a foster child’s case plan is considered and reviewed;
[(c) To have access to a document setting forth such rights that is age-appropriate and develop-
mentally appropriate at the residence of all foster parents and child-caring agencies; and]
(c) To have access to a document setting forth such rights that is developmentally ap-
propriate and trauma responsive, and is prominently displayed at the residence of all foster
parents and child-caring agencies in at least one location that children in care can readily
access at all times; and
(d) To be informed of such rights on at least an annual basis.
[(10) To be provided with an explanation in an age-appropriate manner as to why contact with a
sibling is or has been denied or prohibited.]
(10) To be informed that the right to have contact and visitation with siblings is pre-
sumed and may not be limited, denied or prohibited without written findings by the court
detailing why restrictions are necessary to ensure safe and appropriate contact.
[5]
SB 1533
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
(11) To be informed verbally and in writing, in a developmentally appropriate and
trauma-responsive manner, as to why a specific request for communication or visitation with
a sibling has been limited, denied or prohibited.
[(11)] (12) To have the rights under this section apply regardless of whether the parental rights
of one or more of the foster child’s parents have been terminated, as safe and appropriate.
[(12)] (13) To request that the foster child’s attorney advocate on behalf of the foster child for
contact and visits with siblings:
(a) While the foster child is in foster care;
(b) When the court is considering whether to order visitation between the foster child and the
foster child’s siblings under ORS 419B.367; and
(c) When decisions are made regarding post-adoption contact between the foster child and the
foster child’s siblings.
CHILDREN IN CARE
SECTION 6. (1) The provisions of ORS 418.257 to 418.259 do not apply to investigations
of reports of suspected abuse, as defined in ORS 418.257, of a child in care if the suspected
abuse is committed by the child in care’s parent.
(2) The provisions of ORS 418.521 and 418.523 do not apply to the restraint or involuntary
seclusion of a child in care if the child in care is placed in the restraint or involuntary se-
clusion by the parent of the child in care.
(3) As used in this section, “child in care,” “involuntary seclusion” and “restraint” have
the meanings given those terms in ORS 418.519.
SECTION 7. ORS 409.185 is amended to read:
409.185. (1) The Director of Human Services shall oversee the development of standards and
procedures for assessment, investigation and enforcement of child protective services.
(2)(a) The Department of Human Services shall take action to implement the provision of child
protective services as outlined in ORS 417.705 to 417.800 and based on the recommendations in the
1992 “Oregon Child Protective Services Performance Study” published by the University of Southern
Maine.
(b) In all substantiated cases of child abuse and neglect, the role of the department is to com-
plete a comprehensive family assessment of risk of abuse or neglect, or both, assess service needs
and provide immediate protective services as necessary.
(c) The department shall provide remedial services needed to ensure the safety of the child.
(d) In all cases of child abuse and neglect for which a criminal investigation is conducted, the
role of law enforcement agencies is to provide a legally sound, child sensitive investigation of
whether abuse or neglect or both have occurred and to gather other evidence and perform other
responsibilities in accordance with interagency agreements.
(e) The department and law enforcement agencies shall conduct the investigation and assess-
ment concurrently, based upon the protocols and procedures of the county child abuse multidisci-
plinary team in each jurisdiction.
(f) When the department and law enforcement agencies conduct a joint investigation and as-
sessment, the activities of the department and agencies are to be clearly differentiated by the pro-
tocols of the county child abuse multidisciplinary team.
(g) Nothing in this subsection is intended to be inconsistent with ORS 418.702, 418.747 and
[6]
SB 1533
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
418.748 and ORS chapter 419B.
(h) In all cases of child abuse for which an investigation is conducted, the department shall
provide a child’s parent, guardian or caregiver with a clear written explanation of the investigation
process, the court hearing process and the rights of the parent, guardian or caregiver in the abuse
investigation and in the court proceedings related to the abuse investigation. When the depart-
ment provides the written explanation under this paragraph to a child’s parent or guardian,
the department shall include a disclosure that the representative of the department is acting
on behalf of the department and cannot provide legal advice to the parent or guardian.
(3) Upon receipt of a recommendation of the Children’s Advocate under ORS 417.815 (2)(e), the
department shall implement the recommendation or give the Children’s Advocate written notice of
an intent not to implement the recommendation.
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION 8. The unit captions used in this 2026 Act are provided only for the convenience
of the reader and do not become part of the statutory law of this state or express any leg-
islative intent in the enactment of this 2026 Act.
SECTION 9. This 2026 Act being necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
peace, health and safety, an emergency is declared to exist, and this 2026 Act takes effect
on its passage.
[7]
