1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1539
Printed pursuant to Senate Interim Rule 213.28 by order of the President of the Senate in conformance with pre-
session filing rules, indicating neither advocacy nor opposition on the part of the President (at the request
of Senate Interim Committee on Natural Resources and Wildfire)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: The Act says a person might be allowed to do certain jobs with animals, like checking
if cows are pregnant, even if they are not veterinarians. Allows the ODA to adopt rules to explain
when this is okay. (Flesch Readability Score: 65.1).
Allows an individual to verify whether cattle are pregnant without holding a valid license issued
by the Oregon State Veterinary Medical Examining Board under certain circumstances. Permits the
State Department of Agriculture to adopt rules.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to providing animal health care; amending ORS 686.040.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. ORS 686.040 is amended to read:
686.040. (1) ORS 686.020 (1)(a) does not apply to the following:
(a) Commissioned veterinary officers of the United States Army, or those in the employ of other
United States Government agencies while engaged in their official capacity, unless they enter into
a private practice.
(b) An individual who has received training to verify whether cattle are pregnant and is
performing pregnancy verification services on cattle within the scope of the individual’s
training.
(2) Nothing in ORS 167.322 or 686.020 (1)(a) shall be so construed as to prevent any person or
the agent or employee of the person from practicing veterinary medicine and surgery or dentistry
in a humane manner on any animal belonging to the person, agent or employee or for gratuitous
services or from dehorning and vaccinating cattle for the person, agent or employee.
(3) Nothing in ORS 686.020 (1)(a) shall be so construed as to prevent the selling of veterinary
remedies and instruments by a licensed pharmacist at the regular place of business of the licensed
pharmacist.
(4) A practitioner of allied health methods may practice that method on animals without vio-
lating ORS 686.020 (1)(a), as long as the practice is in conformance with laws and rules governing
the practitioner’s practice and the practice is upon referral from a licensed veterinarian for treat-
ment or therapy specified by the veterinarian.
(5) ORS 686.020 (1)(a) does not apply to the lay testing of poultry by the whole blood
agglutination test.
(6) A certified euthanasia technician holding an active, current certificate may inject sodium
pentobarbital, sedative and analgesic medications and any other euthanasia substance approved by
the Oregon State Veterinary Medical Examining Board without violating ORS 686.020 (1)(a).
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 180
SB 1539
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
(7) The board by rule may specify circumstances under which unlicensed persons may give
vaccinations, administer an anesthetic or otherwise assist in the practice of veterinary medicine.
(8) Any individual licensed as a veterinarian in another state may be used in consultation in this
state with a person licensed to practice veterinary medicine in this state provided the consultation
does not exceed 30 days in any 365 consecutive days.
(9) ORS 686.020 (1)(a) does not apply to authorized representatives of the State Department of
Agriculture in the discharge of any duty authorized by the department.
(10) ORS 686.020 (1)(a) does not apply to an unlicensed representative of a livestock association,
cow-testing association, or poultry association who, for the benefit of the association, takes blood
samples for laboratory tests for the diagnosis of livestock or poultry diseases, but only if this person
has received authorization from the State Department of Agriculture following a written request to
the department.
(11) ORS 686.020 (1)(a) does not apply to persons permitted by the State Department of Fish and
Wildlife to rehabilitate orphaned, sick or injured wildlife, as defined in ORS 496.004, for the purpose
of restoring the animals to the wild.
(12) ORS 686.020 (1)(a) does not apply to students, agents or employees of public or private ed-
ucational or medical research institutions involved in educational or research activities under the
auspices of those institutions.
(13) ORS 686.020 (1)(a) does not apply to:
(a) Veterinarians employed by Oregon State University;
(b) Instructors of veterinary courses; or
(c) Students of veterinary science who participate in the diagnosis and treatment of animals if
the students:
(A) Are participating in the diagnosis and treatment of animals while engaged in an educational
program approved by the board or a college of veterinary medicine accredited by the American
Veterinary Medical Association; and
(B) Are under the direct supervision of an Oregon licensed veterinarian or a veterinarian ap-
proved by the board or Oregon State University to supervise students in the educational program.
(14) The State Department of Agriculture may by rule specify circumstances under which
unlicensed persons may engage in activities described in subsection (1)(b) of this section.
[2]
