1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1526
Printed pursuant to Senate Interim Rule 213.28 by order of the President of the Senate in conformance with pre-
session filing rules, indicating neither advocacy nor opposition on the part of the President (at the request
of Senate Interim Committee on Energy and Environment)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: Tells ODOE to apply for moneys to pay for the formation of a new entity that can fi-
nance projects. (Flesch Readability Score: 62.8).
Requires the State Department of Energy to apply for grant moneys from the State Agency
Program Fund to cover the costs and expenses of carrying out pre-startup activities and forming a
nonprofit entity. Allows the department to also apply for moneys from other sources.
Directs the department to carry out pre-startup activities, including recruiting and convening
a founding board, if the department secures sufficient grant moneys. Directs the founding board to
form a nonprofit entity for the purpose of financing clean energy and resilience projects. Requires
the entity to report annually to the appropriate committees or interim committees of the Legislative
Assembly.
Directs the Oregon Business Development Department and the State Department of Energy to
work with the entity.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to the facilitation of projects.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. (1) The State Department of Energy shall apply to the Environmental Res-
toration Council, established under ORS 541.861, for grant moneys from the State Agency
Program Fund, established under ORS 541.867, and may also apply for moneys from other
sources, for the purpose of covering:
(a) The department’s costs and expenses in carrying out subsection (2) of this section;
and
(b) The organizational, startup and administrative costs of the founding board, convened
under subsection (2) of this section, in carrying out subsection (3) of this section.
(2) If the department secures grant moneys in a sufficient amount, but not less than $2
million, the department shall carry out pre-startup activities to include recruiting and con-
vening a founding board. The founding board must consist of at least seven members as fol-
lows:
(a) The Director of the State Department of Energy;
(b) The Director of the Oregon Business Development Department or the director’s
designee;
(c) The Director of the Housing and Community Services Department or the director’s
designee; and
(d) Four members who:
(A) Represent nongovernmental organizations;
(B) Have expertise in one or more of the following subjects:
(i) Financing at a local government, community development financial institution, credit
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 226
SB 1526
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
union, community bank or similar institution;
(ii) Energy utilities;
(iii) Clean energy projects, energy efficiency, zero-emissions transportation and technol-
ogies;
(iv) State infrastructure, community development and resilience and extreme weather
events;
(v) Investment fund management; or
(vi) Clean energy and resilience programs and the deployment of clean energy technolo-
gies; and
(C) Have a diverse range of perspectives, lived experiences and expertise that represent:
(i) The different geographical regions of this state;
(ii) Lower income, tribal, rural or underserved communities;
(iii) Commercial enterprises in the clean energy or resiliency sector; or
(iv) Labor and workforce development.
(3) The founding board, convened under subsection (2) of this section, shall form a
nonprofit entity for the purpose of financing clean energy and resilience projects that facili-
tate:
(a) The generation, transmission, production or storage of clean energy or clean fuels;
(b) The conservation or efficient use of energy or fuels;
(c) A reduction in greenhouse gas emissions; or
(d) Improvements in the resilience of infrastructure, natural and working lands, buildings
or communities, with priority given to lower income, tribal, rural or underserved communi-
ties.
(4) The nonprofit entity formed pursuant to subsection (3) of this section must:
(a) Have a charter that requires a supermajority of the entity’s board to change or
amend.
(b) Be able to receive capital in any form from public and private sources.
(c) Report annually to the appropriate committees or interim committees of the Legis-
lative Assembly on the entity’s activities, results and financial status.
(5) The Oregon Business Development Department shall work with the nonprofit entity
formed pursuant to subsection (3) of this section to explore potential agreements to provide
capitalization or financing to the nonprofit entity, including through the use of the
department’s bonding authority.
(6) The State Department of Energy shall work with the nonprofit entity formed pursu-
ant to subsection (3) of this section to explore potential contractual relationships and areas
of collaboration.
(7) All state agencies shall assist the State Department of Energy and founding board in
the performance of the department’s and the founding board’s duties and functions under
this section.
[2]
