1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1513
Printed pursuant to Senate Interim Rule 213.28 by order of the President of the Senate in conformance with pre-
session filing rules, indicating neither advocacy nor opposition on the part of the President (at the request
of Senate Interim Committee on Commerce and General Government)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: The Act gives more time for real estate teams to comply with new law about terms used
in real estate team names.
(Flesch Readability Score: 84.5).
Provides that real estate teams are not required to change terms used in the team name until
July 1, 2027.
Declares an emergency, effective on passage.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to real estate professionals; and declaring an emergency.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. (1) Notwithstanding ORS 696.370 (5), the name of a real estate team may
include the terms “realty” or “real estate” and may be identical to the registered business
name.
(2) The Real Estate Commissioner may not take disciplinary action under ORS 696.301 for
a violation of ORS 696.370 (5).
SECTION 2. Section 1 of this 2026 Act is repealed on July 1, 2027.
SECTION 3. This 2026 Act being necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
peace, health and safety, an emergency is declared to exist, and this 2026 Act takes effect
on its passage.
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 294
