1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1537
Printed pursuant to Senate Interim Rule 213.28 by order of the President of the Senate in conformance with pre-
session filing rules, indicating neither advocacy nor opposition on the part of the President (at the request
of Senate Interim Committee on Education)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: This Act changes some laws related to the board of a community college. This Act takes
effect when the Governor signs it. (Flesch Readability Score: 72.6).
Requires the members of a board of education of a community college district to have an official
electronic mail address that is posted on a publicly accessible website. Requires the board to include
at least one nonvoting member of the board who is a student at a community college in the district.
Requires the board to report to the Legislative Assembly on the board’s compliance with certain
provisions of the Act. Modifies requirements for filling vacancies on the board.
Declares an emergency, effective on passage.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to boards of education of community college districts; creating new provisions; amending
ORS 341.275, 341.283 and 341.335; and declaring an emergency.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. ORS 341.283 is amended to read:
341.283. (1) After July 1 of each year, the board of a district shall meet and organize by electing
a chairperson and a vice chairperson from its members.
(2) The board shall provide for the time and place of its regular meetings, at any of which it
may adjourn to the next succeeding regular meeting or to some specified time prior thereto. Special
meetings shall be convened by order of the chairperson of the board or upon the request of four
board members at least 24 hours before such meeting is to be held, or by common consent of the
board members. Notice of any special meeting shall be given to the members pursuant to bylaws of
the board.
(3) A majority of the board members shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of the ma-
jority of members of the board is required to transact any business.
(4) The board shall adopt rules for the government of the conduct of its members and its pro-
ceedings. The board shall keep a journal and, on the call of any one of its members, shall cause the
yeas and nays to be taken and entered upon its journal upon any question before it.
(5) Any duty imposed upon the board as a body shall be performed at a regular or special
meeting and shall be made a matter of record. The consent to any particular measure obtained from
individual board members when the board is not in session shall not be an act of the board and shall
not be binding upon the district.
(6) Members of the board shall receive no compensation for their services, but they shall be al-
lowed the actual and necessary expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties.
(7) Each member of the board shall have an official institutional electronic mail address
that is posted on a publicly available website for the board.
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 105
SB 1537
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
SECTION 2. The amendments to ORS 341.283 by section 1 of this 2026 Act become oper-
ative 90 days following the effective date of this 2026 Act.
SECTION 3. ORS 341.275 is amended to read:
341.275. [(1) The board shall be composed of seven members.]
[(2) No person who is an employee of the community college district shall be eligible to serve as a
member of the board for the district by which the employee is employed.] (1) The board shall be
composed of seven voting members and at least one nonvoting member who is a student
enrolled in at least six in-person credits per term, other than a summer term, at a commu-
nity college in the district.
(2) A nonvoting member who is a student must be:
(a) Elected or selected through a process held by the student government or student
governance structure at a community college in the district;
(b) At least 18 years of age at the start of the member’s term on the board;
(c) A resident of Oregon;
(d) Permitted to vote ceremonially on any question subject to a vote of the board, with
the vote entered along with the yeas and nays in the journal of the board under ORS 341.283;
(e) Permitted to participate in any meeting, discussion or function of the board, including
any executive session; and
(f) Provided any information distributed to voting members of the board.
(3) A person may not serve on the board of a specific community college district if the
person is an employee of the district.
SECTION 4. The amendments to ORS 341.275 by section 3 of this 2026 Act become oper-
ative on July 1, 2027.
SECTION 5. ORS 341.283, as amended by section 1 of this 2026 Act, is amended to read:
341.283. (1) After July 1 of each year, the board of a district shall meet and organize by electing
a chairperson and a vice chairperson from its voting members.
(2) The board shall provide for the time and place of its regular meetings, at any of which it
may adjourn to the next succeeding regular meeting or to some specified time prior thereto. Special
meetings shall be convened by order of the chairperson of the board or upon the request of four
voting board members at least 24 hours before such meeting is to be held, or by common consent
of the voting board members. Notice of any special meeting shall be given to [the] all members
pursuant to bylaws of the board.
(3) A majority of the voting board members shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of
the majority of voting members of the board is required to transact any business.
(4) The board shall adopt rules for the government of the conduct of its members and its pro-
ceedings. The board shall keep a journal and, on the call of any one of its voting members, shall
cause the yeas and nays to be taken and entered upon its journal upon any question before it.
(5) Any duty imposed upon the board as a body shall be performed at a regular or special
meeting and shall be made a matter of record. The consent to any particular measure obtained from
individual board members when the board is not in session shall not be an act of the board and shall
not be binding upon the district.
(6) Members of the board shall receive no compensation for their services, but they shall be al-
lowed the actual and necessary expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties.
(7) Each member of the board shall have an official institutional electronic mail address that is
posted on a publicly available website for the board.
[2]
SB 1537
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
SECTION 6. The amendments to ORS 341.283 by section 5 of this 2026 Act become oper-
ative on July 1, 2027.
SECTION 7. Each community college district shall submit a report that includes dis-
cussion of the degree to which the community college has complied with the requirements
of ORS 341.275 and 341.283, as amended by sections 1 and 3 of this 2026 Act, to the interim
committees of the Legislative Assembly related to higher education not later than September
1, 2028. The report under this section must include input from representatives of student,
faculty and nonfaculty staff governance organizations.
SECTION 8. ORS 341.335 is amended to read:
341.335. (1) The board shall declare the office of a board member vacant if it finds any of the
following:
(a) The incumbent has died or resigned.
(b) The incumbent has been removed or recalled from office or the election of the incumbent
thereto has been declared void by the judgment of a court.
(c) The incumbent has ceased to be a resident of the district from which the incumbent was
nominated or elected.
(d) The incumbent has ceased to discharge the duties of office for two consecutive months unless
prevented therefrom by sickness or other unavoidable cause or unless excused by the chairperson
of the board.
(2) A board member who is nominated or elected by zone and who changes permanent residence
from one zone of a district to another zone or who by a change in zone boundaries no longer resides
in the zone of nomination or election is entitled to continue to serve as board member until June
30 following the next regular district election at which a successor shall be elected by the electors
to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any. The successor shall take office July 1 next
following the election.
(3) When a vacancy is declared under subsection (1) of this section, and the vacancy occurs
not less than 90 days before the regular district election for the position, the remaining board
members shall meet and appoint a person to fill the vacancy from any of the electors of the district
not more than 90 days after the vacancy occurs, if the position is one filled by both nomination
and election at-large, and otherwise from any of the electors of the zone from which the vacancy
occurs.
(4) [If the offices of a majority of the board members are vacant at the same time,] The governing
body of the principal county shall appoint persons to fill the vacancies from any of the electors of
the district if the positions are filled by both nomination and election at-large, and otherwise from
any of the electors of the zone from which the vacancy occurs if:
(a) The offices of a majority of the board members are vacant at the same time; or
(b) The remaining board members fail to appoint a person to fill a vacancy in accordance
with subsection (3) of this section.
The governing body shall make an appointment under
this paragraph not more than 10 days following the failure of the board to fill a vacancy.
(5) The period of service of a board member appointed under subsection (3) or (4) of this section
commences upon appointment and expires June 30 next following the next regular district election
at which a successor is elected. The successor shall be elected to serve the remainder, if any, of the
term for which the appointment was made. If the term for which the appointment was made expires
June 30 after the election of the successor, the successor shall be elected to a full term. In either
case, the successor shall take office on July 1.
[3]
SB 1537
1
2
3
4
SECTION 9. This 2026 Act being necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
peace, health and safety, an emergency is declared to exist, and this 2026 Act takes effect
on its passage.
[4]
