1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1508
Printed pursuant to Senate Interim Rule 213.28 by order of the President of the Senate in conformance with pre-
session filing rules, indicating neither advocacy nor opposition on the part of the President (at the request
of Senate Interim Committee on Rules and Executive Appointments for Senator Kayse Jama)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: The Act tells the SOS to study elections. (Flesch Readability Score: 82.3).
Requires the Secretary of State to study elections. Directs the Secretary of State to submit
findings to the interim committees of the Legislative Assembly related to elections no later than
September 15, 2027.
Sunsets on January 2, 2028.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to elections.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. The Secretary of State shall study elections. The Secretary of State shall
submit a report in the manner provided by ORS 192.245, and may include recommendations
for legislation, to the interim committees of the Legislative Assembly related to elections
no later than September 15, 2027.
SECTION 2. Section 1 of this 2026 Act is repealed on January 2, 2028.
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 103
