1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1520
Printed pursuant to Senate Interim Rule 213.28 by order of the President of the Senate in conformance with pre-
session filing rules, indicating neither advocacy nor opposition on the part of the President (at the request
of Senate Interim Committee on Labor and Business)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: This Act directs OED to adopt rules for administering the funds in the Paid Family and
Medical Leave Insurance Fund. The Act becomes law 91 days after sine die. (Flesch Readability
Score:
63.7).
Authorizes the Director of the Employment Department to adopt rules establishing an account-
ing system for handling moneys in the Paid Family and Medical Leave Insurance Fund.
Takes effect on the 91st day following adjournment sine die.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to the administration of moneys within the Paid Family and Medical Leave Insurance Fund;
amending ORS 657B.430; and prescribing an effective date.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. ORS 657B.430 is amended to read:
657B.430. (1) The Paid Family and Medical Leave Insurance Fund is established in the State
Treasury, separate and distinct from the General Fund. The Paid Family and Medical Leave Insur-
ance Fund is declared to be a trust fund.
(2) The fund consists of moneys deposited in the fund from contributions made under ORS
657B.150 and from penalties, fees, revenues and all other amounts deposited in or credited to the
fund. Interest earned by the fund shall be credited to the fund.
(3) Moneys in the fund are continuously appropriated to the Director of the Employment De-
partment and may be used solely to:
(a) Carry out the purposes set forth in this chapter, including the payment of administrative
costs and expenses that the director incurs in carrying out the provisions of this chapter; and
(b) Pay the compensation of the Director of the Employment Department in accordance with
ORS 657.608.
(4)(a) To ensure compliance with tax reporting and withholding requirements, the direc-
tor may adopt rules establishing an accounting system for contributions made to and bene-
fits paid from the fund. The accounting system may include a method for:
(A) Allocating moneys from the fund for the payment of benefits by type of qualifying
leave available under this chapter; and
(B) Restricting the use of moneys for the payment of benefits for a specific type of leave
to moneys received solely from employee contributions, solely from employer contributions
or a combination of employee and employer contributions in a manner determined by the
director.
(b) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as authorizing the director to change
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 220
SB 1520
1
2
3
4
5
6
the percentage of the total rate of contributions required to be paid by employers and em-
ployees under ORS 657B.150 beyond the authority granted to the director under ORS 657B.150
(1).
SECTION 2. This 2026 Act takes effect on the 91st day after the date on which the 2026
regular session of the Eighty-third Legislative Assembly adjourns sine die.
[2]
