1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1556
Printed pursuant to Senate Interim Rule 213.28 by order of the President of the Senate in conformance with pre-
session filing rules, indicating neither advocacy nor opposition on the part of the President (at the request
of Chief Justice Meagan A. Flynn for Judicial Department)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: The Act changes the laws for the magistrate division of the Oregon Tax Court. (Flesch
Readability Score: 65.7).
Consolidates statutes governing the representation of parties before the magistrate division of
the Oregon Tax Court.
Applies to proceedings commenced on or after January 1, 2027.
Takes effect on the 91st day following adjournment sine die.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to representation of persons in the magistrate division of the Oregon Tax Court; creating
new provisions; amending ORS 305.239, 305.242 and 305.875; repealing ORS 305.245 and 305.494;
and prescribing an effective date.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. Section 2 of this 2026 Act is added to and made a part of ORS 305.404 to
305.560.
SECTION 2. (1) Notwithstanding ORS 8.690, 9.160, 9.320 or 203.145 or ORS chapter 180,
and notwithstanding ORS 9.241 or any rule adopted thereunder unless the rule particularly
refers to the magistrate division of the Oregon Tax Court, in lieu of appearing by an attorney
who is an active licensee of the Oregon State Bar:
(a) A party to a proceeding in the magistrate division of the Oregon Tax Court may be
represented by a natural person designated by the party and recognized by the court as an
authorized representative under this section.
(b) A party that is represented under this subsection is bound by all things done by the
authorized representative and may not thereafter claim that any proceeding was legally de-
fective because the party was not represented by an attorney licensed to practice law in
Oregon.
(c)(A) A taxpayer that is a natural person may designate as the taxpayer’s representative
any other natural person, including a certified public accountant, an individual who is li-
censed as a real estate broker or principal real estate broker under ORS 696.022, an individ-
ual who is a state certified appraiser or state licensed appraiser under ORS 674.310 or is a
registered appraiser under ORS 308.010, a tax preparer or tax consultant licensed under ORS
673.605 to 673.740 or a family member of the taxpayer.
(B) A taxpayer that is a legal entity must designate as the taxpayer’s representative in
the magistrate division of the Oregon Tax Court a natural person, which may include a cer-
tified public accountant, an individual who is licensed as a real estate broker or principal real
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 245
SB 1556
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
estate broker under ORS 696.022, an individual who is a state certified appraiser or state li-
censed appraiser under ORS 674.310 or is a registered appraiser under ORS 308.010, a tax
preparer or tax consultant licensed under ORS 673.605 to 673.740 or an owner, partner,
shareholder, member, officer or employer of the legal entity.
(c) Any other party, including the Department of Revenue or a local government, must
designate as the party’s representative in the magistrate division of the Oregon Tax Court
an officer or authorized employee of the party or of the administrator of the tax at issue
before the tax court.
(2)(a) A taxpayer shall designate a representative under this section by filing with the
court a written authorization in a form acceptable to the court.
(b) Any other party shall designate a representative under this section by filing a plead-
ing, motion or notice with the court naming the representative on behalf of the party.
(3) The court shall recognize a representative for purposes of this section upon desig-
nation as provided under subsection (2) of this section, or may recognize a representative
when it appears to the satisfaction of the magistrate that a representative has authority to
represent the party.
(4) Upon recognizing a representative of a taxpayer other than an attorney licensed to
practice law in Oregon, the court shall provide written notice of the recognition to all par-
ties, and shall include with the notice a statement of the provisions of subsection (1)(b) of
this section.
(5) The represented party, or the court on its own motion, may revoke the authority of
an authorized representative to represent a party in a particular case.
(6) A representative recognized by the court under this section shall also be recognized
by the Department of Revenue as the authorized representative of the party for purposes
of a related proceeding in the magistrate division of the Oregon Tax Court.
SECTION 3. ORS 305.239 is amended to read:
305.239. (1) Notwithstanding ORS 9.320:
(a) Any person who is qualified to practice law or public accountancy in this state, any person
who has been granted active enrollment to practice before the Internal Revenue Service and who
is qualified to prepare tax returns in this state or any person who is the authorized employee of a
taxpayer and is regularly employed by the taxpayer in tax matters may represent the taxpayer be-
fore [a tax court magistrate or] the Department of Revenue in any conference or proceeding with
respect to the administration of any tax.
(b) Any person who is licensed by the State Board of Tax Practitioners or who is exempt from
such licensing requirement as provided for and limited by ORS 673.610 may represent a taxpayer
before [a tax court magistrate or] the department in any conference or proceeding with respect to
the administration of any tax on or measured by net income.
(c) Any shareholder of an S corporation, as defined in section 1361 of the Internal Revenue
Code, as amended and in effect on December 31, 2023, may represent the corporation in any pro-
ceeding before [a tax court magistrate or] the department in the same manner as if the shareholder
were a partner and the S corporation were a partnership. The S corporation must designate in
writing a tax matters shareholder authorized to represent the S corporation.
(d) An individual who is licensed as a real estate broker or principal real estate broker under
ORS 696.022 or is a state certified appraiser or state licensed appraiser under ORS 674.310 or is a
registered appraiser under ORS 308.010 may represent a taxpayer before [a tax court magistrate or]
[2]
SB 1556
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
the department in any conference or proceeding with respect to the administration of any ad
valorem property tax.
(e) A general partner who has been designated by members of a partnership as their tax matters
partner under ORS 305.242 may represent those partners in any conference or proceeding with re-
spect to the administration of any tax on or measured by net income.
(f) Any person authorized under rules adopted by the department may represent a taxpayer be-
fore the department in any conference or proceeding with respect to any tax. Rules adopted under
this paragraph, to the extent feasible, shall be consistent with federal law that governs represen-
tation before the Internal Revenue Service, as federal law is amended and in effect on December 31,
2023.
[(g) Any person authorized under rules adopted by the tax court may represent a taxpayer in a
proceeding before a tax court magistrate.]
(2) A person may not be recognized as representing a taxpayer pursuant to this section unless
there is first filed with the [magistrate or] department a written authorization, or unless it appears
to the satisfaction of the [magistrate or] department that the representative does in fact have au-
thority to represent the taxpayer. A person recognized as an authorized representative [under rules
or procedures adopted] by the tax court shall be considered an authorized representative by the de-
partment for the purpose of a proceeding in the magistrate division of the tax court.
(3) A taxpayer represented by someone other than an attorney is bound by all things done by
the authorized representative, and may not thereafter claim any proceeding was legally defective
because the taxpayer was not represented by an attorney.
(4) Prior to the holding of a conference or proceeding before the [tax court magistrate or] de-
partment, written notice shall be given by the [magistrate or] department to the taxpayer of the
provisions of subsection (3) of this section.
SECTION 4. ORS 305.242 is amended to read:
305.242. (1)(a) When the treatment of partnership items on a partner’s return is consistent with
the treatment of that item on the partnership return and results in a notice of deficiency, the part-
ners may designate a tax matters partner to represent each of them before the Department of Re-
venue in any conference or [before a tax court magistrate] in any proceeding with respect to the
administration of any tax on or measured by net income.
(b) Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this subsection, a tax matters partner shall be designated
as provided in ORS 314.733 (2), in the case of a partnership subject to ORS 314.731 to 314.737.
(2) The designation of a tax matters partner shall be made in writing and filed with the de-
partment [or magistrate] within 30 days after the date of the notice of deficiency. The tax matters
partner must be:
(a) A general partner in the partnership at some time during the taxable year; or
(b) A general partner in the partnership at the time the designation is made.
(3) If a notice explaining the partnership adjustments is mailed by the department to the tax
matters partner with respect to any partnership taxable year, the tax matters partner shall supply
the department [or, if applicable, the magistrate] with the name, address, profits interest and taxpayer
identification number of each person who was a partner in the partnership at any time during the
taxable year, unless that information was provided in the partnership return for that year.
(4) A timely request for a conference filed with the department [or appeal filed with the tax
court] by the tax matters partner shall be considered as a request [or an appeal] by all of the part-
ners represented by the tax matters partner, and all issues regarding treatment of partnership items
[3]
SB 1556
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
shall be resolved in a single conference.
(5) A partner who elects to be represented by a tax matters partner, or any partner in a part-
nership subject to ORS 314.731 to 314.737, shall be bound by all things done by the tax matters
partner and may not thereafter claim that any act or proceeding was legally defective because the
partner was not represented by an attorney.
SECTION 5. ORS 305.875 is amended to read:
305.875. In any meeting or communication with the Department of Revenue, including but not
limited to audits, conferences, interviews and any other meeting or communication between the
taxpayer and the department, the taxpayer shall have the following rights, unless waived by the
taxpayer:
(1) The right to an explanation, by an officer or employee of the department before or during
the meeting of:
(a) The audit, conference or meeting process and the taxpayer’s rights under such process; and
(b) The collection process and the taxpayer’s rights under such process.
(2) The right to make an audio recording of any meeting relating to the determination or col-
lection of any tax with the department representative, using the taxpayer’s own equipment, and at
the taxpayer’s own expense.
(3) If the department makes an audio recording of the meeting, the taxpayer has the right to
advance notice of the recording and a copy of the recording upon request. The taxpayer shall re-
imburse the department the reasonable cost of the copy.
(4) The right to consult with an attorney, certified public accountant, enrolled agent, or an other
person permitted to represent a taxpayer at any meeting before the department, if the taxpayer
clearly states to the department representative at any time during any meeting, that the taxpayer
wishes to consult with the person. This subsection does not apply to a meeting initiated by an ad-
ministrative subpoena.
(5) The right to be represented by anyone who is permitted to represent the taxpayer before the
department, as provided under ORS 305.239 and [305.245] section 2 of this 2026 Act.
(6) The right not to be present, if represented, at the meeting unless subpoenaed by the depart-
ment pursuant to ORS 305.190, or other laws of this state.
SECTION 6. ORS 305.245 and 305.494 are repealed.
SECTION 7. Section 2 of this 2026 Act, the amendments to ORS 305.239, 305.242 and
305.875 by sections 3 to 5 of this 2026 Act and the repeal of ORS 305.245 and 305.494 by section
6 of this 2026 Act apply to proceedings commenced in the magistrate division of the Oregon
Tax Court on or after January 1, 2027.
SECTION 8. This 2026 Act takes effect on the 91st day after the date on which the 2026
regular session of the Eighty-third Legislative Assembly adjourns sine die.
[4]
