1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1524
Sponsored by Senator HAYDEN (Presession filed.)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: The Act uses money from the lottery to support horse racing. (Flesch Readability Score:
64.9).
Creates a continuing allocation of lottery revenues to support specified horse racing events and
facilities. Becomes operative July 1, 2027.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to horse racing; creating new provisions; and amending ORS 565.446 and 565.447.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. ORS 565.447 is amended to read:
565.447. (1) Subject only to the availability of unobligated net lottery proceeds, there is allocated
from the Administrative Services Economic Development Fund to:
(a) The County Fair Account created under ORS 565.445 an amount equal to one percent of the
net proceeds from the Oregon State Lottery, but not to exceed $1.53 million annually, adjusted
biennially pursuant to an inflation factor determined by dividing the Consumer Price Index for All
Urban Consumers, West Region (All Items), as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the
United States Department of Labor, for January 1 immediately preceding commencement of the
biennium, by the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers of the Portland, Oregon, Standard
Metropolitan Statistical Area, as compiled by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of
Labor Statistics, for January 1, 2001[.]; and
(b) The Horse Racing Account established under section 3 of this 2026 Act an amount
equal to three-tenths of one percent of the net proceeds from the Oregon State Lottery.
(2) The allocation of moneys from the Administrative Services Economic Development Fund un-
der this section is subject to the requirements in [section 4,] Article XV, section 4, of the Oregon
Constitution, for deposit of specified amounts of the net proceeds from the Oregon State Lottery into
the Education Stability Fund and into the Parks and Natural Resources Fund and shall be made only
after satisfaction or payment of:
(a) Amounts allocated to Westside lottery bonds issued under ORS 391.140 or to the reserves
or any refunding related to the Westside lottery bonds in accordance with the priority for allocation
and disbursement established by ORS 391.130;
(b) All liens, pledges or other obligations relating to lottery bonds or refunding lottery bonds
due or payable during the year for which an allocation is to be made; and
(c) Amounts required by any other pledges of, or liens on, net proceeds from the Oregon State
Lottery.
SECTION 2. ORS 565.446 is amended to read:
565.446. The Legislative Assembly finds and declares that financial support of county fairs and
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 80
SB 1524
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
horse racing events will result in economic development for areas where fairgrounds are located
by promoting, expanding or preventing the decline of businesses and that the use of the net proceeds
from the operation of the Oregon State Lottery to fund county fairs and horse racing events is
an appropriate use of state lottery funds under [section 4,] Article XV, section 4, of the Oregon
Constitution, and ORS 461.540.
SECTION 3. (1) The Horse Racing Account is established in the State Treasury, separate
and distinct from the General Fund. The account consists of moneys allocated under ORS
565.447 and all other moneys deposited in or transferred to the account by the Legislative
Assembly or otherwise. Interest earned by the account shall be credited to the account. The
moneys in the account are continuously appropriated to the Oregon Racing Commission to
be used as provided in subsection (2) of this section.
(2) The commission shall use the moneys in the account to support horse racing events
operated by licensees described in ORS 462.057 (2), and horse racing events held on county
fairgrounds in Crook County, Josephine County, Tillamook County and Union County, by
carrying out any of the following activities:
(a) Maintaining horse racing tracks at the fairgrounds;
(b) Supporting purse money and jockey incentives to attract better horse and human
athletes;
(c) Funding veterinarians to treat horses at the horse racing tracks and medical profes-
sionals to treat jockeys at the horse racing tracks;
(d) Purchasing horse racing safety equipment for use at the horse racing events;
(e) Operating the horse racing events, including paying for the costs of security and in-
surance; and
(f) Building or maintaining horse racing infrastructure that enhances or protects the
safety or well-being of racehorses.
SECTION 4. ORS 565.446 and 565.447 and section 3 of this 2026 Act are added to and made
a part of ORS chapter 565.
SECTION 5. The amendments to ORS 565.446 and 565.447 by sections 1 and 2 of this 2026
Act become operative July 1, 2027.
[2]
