1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1535
Sponsored by Senator ANDERSON (Presession filed.)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: The Act tells DELC to study child care and submit a report to the legislature. (Flesch
Readability Score: 73.1).
Requires the Department of Early Learning and Care to study child care. Directs the depart-
ment to submit findings to the interim committees of the Legislative Assembly related to child care
no later than September 15, 2027.
Sunsets on January 2, 2028.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to child care.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. The Department of Early Learning and Care shall study child care. The de-
partment shall submit a report in the manner provided by ORS 192.245, and may include
recommendations for legislation, to the interim committees of the Legislative Assembly re-
lated to child care no later than September 15, 2027.
SECTION 2. Section 1 of this 2026 Act is repealed on January 2, 2028.
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 293
