1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1546
Printed pursuant to Senate Interim Rule 213.28 by order of the President of the Senate in conformance with pre-
session filing rules, indicating neither advocacy nor opposition on the part of the President (at the request
of Senate Interim Committee on Early Childhood and Behavioral Health)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: Tells those who make AI software to tell users that the users are talking to software,
not a human. Tells them they must try to prevent users from getting output that causes suicidal
feelings or thoughts. (Flesch Readability Score: 71.0).
Requires operators of artificial intelligence companions and artificial intelligence platforms to
provide notice to users that the users are interacting with artificial output. Requires the operators
to have in place a protocol for detecting suicidal ideation or intent or self-harm ideation or intent
and to prevent output that could cause such ideation or intent in users. Specifies minimum contents
of the protocol. Requires an operator to make certain statements and disclosures if the operator has
reason to believe that a user that interacts with the operator’s artificial intelligence companion or
artificial intelligence platform is a minor and prohibits the operator from causing the artificial in-
telligence companion to perform certain actions.
Requires an operator to report each year to the
Oregon Health Authority concerning incidents in which the operator referred a user to resources
to prevent suicidal ideation, suicide or self-harm.
Allows a user that suffers ascertainable harm to bring an action for damages and injunctive
relief.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to artificial intelligence companions.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. (1) As used in this section:
(a)(A) “Artificial intelligence companion” means software or a combination of software
and hardware that can infer from received natural language input how to generate outputs
that can perform one or more of the following actions:
(i) Mimic written or spoken natural language or social interaction that is adaptive,
anthropomorphic and capable of meeting some users’ social needs;
(ii) Use information from a record of previous interactions with the user to engage in
dialogues that give the appearance of a continuity of interaction between the user and the
artificial intelligence companion or that can mimic some features of a social relationship
between the user and the artificial intelligence companion;
(iii) Adapt to new circumstances or new input while maintaining a continuity of
anthropomorphic features that mimic a human personality; or
(iv) Generate output that can affect, control or influence a natural person’s behavior or
a physical or virtual environment.
(B) “Artificial intelligence companion” does not include:
(i) Software that operates solely for the purpose of customer service, business oper-
ations, productivity, information analysis, internal research or technical assistance, regard-
less of the software’s capability to use natural language inputs and generate natural
language outputs;
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 282
SB 1546
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
(ii) Software incorporated into a video game that is limited to providing interaction only
with the features of the video game, if the software does not respond to input on topics such
as mental health, self-harm, sexually explicit conduct or other topics unrelated to the fea-
tures of the video game; or
(iii) A stand-alone consumer electronic device that functions as a speaker and voice
command interface or acts as a voice-activated virtual assistant and does not perform
actions of the type described in subparagraph (A) of this paragraph.
(b) “Artificial intelligence platform” means a website, application or other combination
of software and hardware that allows or facilitates operation of and interaction with an ar-
tificial intelligence companion.
(c) “Operator” means a person that operates or makes an artificial intelligence platform
or artificial intelligence companion available to users in this state.
(d) “Sexually explicit conduct” has the meaning given that term in ORS 163.665.
(2) A provider of an artificial intelligence companion or an operator of an artificial in-
telligence platform that provides access to an artificial intelligence companion shall provide
on the artificial intelligence platform, and cause the artificial intelligence companion to pre-
cede each response with, a clear and conspicuous notice that indicates that a user is inter-
acting with artificially generated output and not a natural person.
(3)(a) An operator may not allow users in this state access to an artificial intelligence
companion or artificial intelligence platform unless the operator has a protocol for using
evidence-based methods for detecting input from the user that consists of suicidal ideation
or intent or self-harm ideation or intent and that prevents the provision of content to the
user that could cause suicidal ideation, suicide or self-harm in the user.
(b) The protocol described in paragraph (a) of this subsection at a minimum must:
(A) Notify any user that expresses suicidal ideation or intent or self-harm ideation or
intent with a referral to a suicide hotline or crisis management agency or similar resources
that provide appropriate counseling; and
(B) Immediately interrupt a conversation between an artificial intelligence companion
and a user if the conversation consists of user suicidal ideation or intent or self harm
ideation or intent.
(c) An operator shall publish on the operator’s artificial intelligence platform the details
of the operator’s protocol.
(4)(a) If an operator has reason to believe that a user of the operator’s artificial intelli-
gence companion or artificial intelligence platform is a minor, the operator shall:
(A) State that the operator’s artificial intelligence companion or artificial intelligence
platform may not be suitable for minors;
(B) Disclose to the user that the user is interacting with artificially generated output;
(C) Provide a clear and conspicuous reminder at a minimum of every hour of interaction
that the user should take a break from interactions with the artificial intelligence companion
or artificial intelligence platform, along with a further reminder that the user is interacting
with artificially generated output; and
(D) Use reasonable measures to ensure that the artificial intelligence companion does
not produce visual representations of sexually explicit conduct or suggest or state that the
minor should engage in sexually explicit conduct.
(b) In the circumstances described in paragraph (a) of this subsection, an operator may
[2]
SB 1546
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
not cause an artificial intelligence companion to:
(A) Deliver to a user, either on a variable schedule or otherwise, a system of rewards
or affirmations with the purpose of reinforcing behavior or maximizing the time during
which the user engages with the artificial intelligence companion;
(B) Generate in response to a user’s indication of a desire to end a conversation, reduce
engagement time or delete the user’s account unsolicited messages of simulated emotional
distress, loneliness, or abandonment or otherwise attempt to arouse guilt or sympathy in the
user; or
(C) Make a material misrepresentation about the artificial intelligence companion’s
identity, capabilities, training data or about whether the user is interacting with artificially
generated output, including when the user directly questions the artificial intelligence com-
panion about any of these topics.
(5)(a) Not later than December 31 of each year, an operator shall report to the Oregon
Health Authority:
(A) The number of times during the calendar year preceding the report in which the op-
erator provided a referral under subsection (3) of this section; and
(B) The details of the operator’s protocol under subsection (3) of this section.
(b) An operator may not report to the authority any personal information that identifies
an individual.
(c) The authority by rule may specify the form, format and contents of the report re-
quired under this subsection.
(d) The authority shall publish on the authority’s website a summary of the reports the
authority received from operators during the previous calendar year.
SECTION 2. (1) An individual who suffers an ascertainable loss of money or property or
other injury in fact as a result of an operator’s violation of section 1 of this 2026 Act may
bring an action in a court of this state to recover:
(a) The greater of the individual’s actual damages or statutory damages of $1,000 for each
violation; and
(b) An injunction to prevent or restrain the violation.
(2) A court may award a prevailing plaintiff attorney fees and costs in an action under
this section.
(3) Relief or a recovery under this section does not relieve an operator of any duty,
remedy or obligation to which the operator is subject under other applicable law.
[3]
