1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1555
Printed pursuant to Senate Interim Rule 213.28 by order of the President of the Senate in conformance with pre-
session filing rules, indicating neither advocacy nor opposition on the part of the President (at the request
of Joint Interim Committee on Public Education Appropriation)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: Changes the method that is used to prepare a report on the amount of state money that
is used to fund public education. (Flesch Readability Score: 62.1).
Directs the Joint Interim Committee on Ways and Means to use a cost model for the purpose
of calculating the sum of moneys sufficient to meet the state’s system of public education quality
goals. Modifies the public education quality goals for the purpose of the cost model and makes re-
lated changes specifying when a school district is a standard school district.
Abolishes a joint committee related to the appropriation of moneys for public education.
Abolishes the Quality Education Commission.
Declares an emergency, effective on passage.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to the constitutional requirements for public education appropriations; creating new pro-
visions; amending ORS 326.726, 327.006, 327.158, 327.161, 327.162, 327.185, 327.297, 328.205,
329.045, 329.085, 329.155, 329.496, 332.155, 334.217, 335.090, 336.580, 336.665, 339.297, 339.343,
339.356 and 343.328; repealing ORS 171.857, 327.290, 327.497, 327.500, 327.502, 327.506, 329.015
and 329.025; and declaring an emergency.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
REVISED METHOD FOR PREPARING A REPORT ON
PUBLIC EDUCATION APPROPRIATIONS
SECTION 1. For the purpose of Article VIII, section 8, of the Oregon Constitution, the
Legislative Assembly declares that the quality goals of public education in this state are:
(1) Compliance by every school district of this state with the requirements of a standard
school district, as prescribed by ORS 327.158.
(2) That every teacher in the public schools of this state be:
(a) Licensed or registered as provided by statute; and
(b) Qualified to teach the subject or grade level the teacher is teaching.
(3) Satisfaction of the statewide targets for the metrics identified in ORS 327.165 (2)(a)(A)
to (G).
SECTION 2. (1) As required by Article VIII, section 8, of the Oregon Constitution, the
Legislative Assembly shall publish a report related to the funding of public education in this
state.
(2) The report required under this section must either:
(a) Demonstrate that the sum of all moneys appropriated by the Legislative Assembly
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 43
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
during the odd-numbered year regular session for the biennium beginning July 1 of that year
is sufficient to meet the state’s system of public education quality goals identified in section
1 of this 2026 Act; or
(b) If the sum of all moneys appropriated by the Legislative Assembly during the odd-
numbered year regular session for the biennium beginning July 1 of that year is not suffi-
cient to meet the state’s system of public education quality goals identified in section 1 of
this 2026 Act, identify:
(A) The reasons for the insufficiency;
(B) The extent of the insufficiency; and
(C) The impact of the insufficiency on the ability of the state’s system of public education
to meet the quality goals.
(3) The report described in subsection (2) of this section shall be prepared by the Joint
Interim Committee on Ways and Means. The committee shall determine the amount suffi-
cient to meet the state’s system of public education quality goals by using the cost model
and cost estimate updates in the manner described in section 3 of this 2026 Act.
(4) The report required by this section must be published within 180 days after
adjournment sine die of the odd-numbered year regular session of the Legislative Assembly.
SECTION 3. (1) The Joint Interim Committee on Ways and Means shall use the cost
model and cost estimate updates developed as provided in this section for the purpose of
preparing the report described in section 2 of this 2026 Act.
(2) Except as provided in subsection (6) of this section, the committee shall:
(a) Use the cost model for the biennium for which the cost model is developed under a
contract described in subsection (3) of this section; and
(b) Use the cost estimate updates in the manner described in subsection (7) of this sec-
tion for the biennia following the biennium described in paragraph (a) of this subsection until
a new cost model is developed.
(3) The Legislative Policy and Research Director shall enter into a contract with a public
or private entity for the purpose of developing a cost model. The cost model shall be used
to:
(a) Identify the resources necessary to meet the state’s system of public education
quality goals described in section 1 of this 2026 Act; and
(b) Identify the cost to provide the resources identified in paragraph (a) of this subsection
by:
(A) Using formulas established by statute to provide funding for specialized educational
settings, including funding for students in a long term care or treatment facility, a hospital
program, a detention or corrections program and any other statewide program identified by
the Legislative Fiscal Officer in consultation with the Legislative Policy and Research Di-
rector.
(B) Considering research, evidence and the professional judgment of currently practicing
educators in this state.
(C) Developing prototypes of schools and school districts that take into account:
(i) The variations in the sizes and geographic locations of the schools and school districts
of this state;
(ii) Student populations for which additional amounts are distributed as provided by ORS
327.013 (1)(c); and
[2]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
(iii) The fixed costs of schools and school districts in this state.
(D) Prioritizing resources in case of limited funding.
(4) The cost model developed under this section must include a mechanism that allows
for cost estimate updates to be made as described in subsection (7) of this section.
(5) The entity with which the director enters into a contract under subsection (3) of this
section must:
(a) Provide to the director all documentation used to develop the cost model. The doc-
umentation must clearly and thoroughly describe:
(A) The goals, program components and base assumptions used to develop the cost
model; and
(B) The resource specifications used for each school and school district prototype.
(b) Provide to the Department of Education the documentation described in paragraph
(a)(B) of this subsection. The department shall make the documentation:
(A) Available to the school districts of this state; and
(B) Publicly available on the department’s website.
(6)(a) The director must enter into a contract for the development of a cost model at
least once every eight years.
(b) The contract must:
(A) Be entered into at least 18 months prior to the date by which the cost model must
be completed as described in subparagraph (B) of this paragraph; and
(B) Require the cost model to be completed no later than February 1 of the year prior
to the year in which the report required by section 2 of this 2026 Act will be published.
(c) Notwithstanding the timeline prescribed by paragraph (a) of this subsection:
(A) The Legislative Assembly may require the director to enter into a contract sooner
than every eight years as long as the timelines prescribed by paragraph (b) of this subsection
can be met.
(B) The director is not required to enter into a contract if the Legislative Assembly does
not provide funding for the contract.
(7)(a) For biennia described in subsection (2)(b) of this section, the Oregon Department
of Administrative Services shall update the cost estimates of the cost model using the
mechanism described in subsection (4) of this section. The cost estimate updates shall take
into consideration inflation and other costs in a manner that is consistent with the process
by which the Governor’s budget is prepared.
(b) Cost estimate updates made by the department as provided by this subsection must
be prepared and provided to the Joint Interim Committee on Ways and Means no later than
June 1 of the year prior to the year in which the report required by section 2 of this 2026
Act will be published.
(8) All agencies of state government, as defined in ORS 174.111, are directed to assist the
Joint Interim Committee on Ways and Means and the Oregon Department of Administrative
Services in the performance of the duties of the committee and department under this sec-
tion and, to the extent permitted by laws relating to confidentiality, to furnish information
that the committee and department consider necessary for the purposes of this section.
SECTION 4. (1) Sections 1 to 3 of this 2026 Act apply to reports prepared on and after
November 1, 2029.
(2) The Legislative Policy and Research Officer shall begin the process to first enter into
[3]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
a contract described in section 3 of this 2026 Act within one week after the effective date of
this 2026 Act to ensure completion of the cost model no later than February 1, 2028.
(3) The Joint Interim Committee on Ways and Means shall first use a cost model as de-
scribed in section 3 of this 2026 Act for the report published after November 1, 2029.
(4) The Oregon Department of Administrative Services shall first use the cost estimate
updates, as described in section 3 (7) of this 2026 Act, no later than June 1, 2030, for the re-
port published after November 1, 2031.
(5) For the report published after November 1, 2027, the Oregon Department of Admin-
istrative Services shall make adjustments to the costs provided in the report adopted No-
vember 19, 2025, by taking into consideration inflation and other costs in a manner that is
consistent with the process by which the Governor’s budget is prepared.
STANDARD SCHOOL DISTRICTS
SECTION 5. ORS 327.158 is amended to read:
327.158. [(1) All school districts are presumed to maintain a standard school district until the
school district has been found to be deficient by the Superintendent of Public Instruction, pursuant to
standards and rules of the State Board of Education.]
(1) All school districts of this state are expected to fully comply with the requirements
of state and federal law to be considered a standard school district.
(2) A school district is presumed to be a standard school district unless the Superinten-
dent of Public Instruction has found the school district to be in noncompliance with a state
or federal law or with a standard established by the State Board of Education by rule.
[(2)] (3) If [any deficiencies are not corrected] a school district does not come into compliance
before the beginning of the school year next following the date of the finding of [deficiency] non-
compliance and if an extension has not been granted under subsection [(3)] (4) of this section, the
Superintendent of Public Instruction may withhold portions of State School Fund moneys otherwise
allocated to the school district for operating expenses until [such deficiencies are corrected] the
school district comes into compliance unless the withholding would create an undue hardship,
as determined pursuant to rules of the State Board of Education.
[(3)(a)] (4)(a) Within 90 days of the finding of [deficiency] noncompliance, a school district
[found not to be in compliance] shall submit a plan, acceptable to the Superintendent of Public In-
struction, for [meeting standardization requirements] coming into compliance. A team of Depart-
ment of Education staff shall contact the school district and offer technical assistance. When an
acceptable plan for [meeting standardization requirements] coming into compliance has been sub-
mitted, the Superintendent of Public Instruction may allow an extension of time before withholding
moneys, not to exceed 12 months, if the superintendent determines that [such deficiencies cannot be
corrected or removed] compliance cannot be achieved before the beginning of the next school year.
(b) Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this subsection, the Superintendent of Public Instruction
may not grant an extension of time if a school district could [correct the deficiency] come into
compliance through merger.
(c) For the period of the extension of time under this subsection, the school district shall be
considered a conditionally standard school district.
[(4)(a)] (5)(a) Regardless of whether the Superintendent of Public Instruction has granted a
school district an extension of time under subsection [(3)] (4) of this section and except as provided
[4]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
in paragraph (b) of this subsection, a school district that fails to submit a plan for [meeting stand-
ardization requirements] coming into compliance within the time specified by the superintendent
may not receive further State School Fund moneys until a plan acceptable to the superintendent is
submitted.
(b) Pursuant to rules adopted by the State Board of Education, the Superintendent of Public
Instruction may extend the time specified for submitting a plan if the superintendent determines that
a human-created disaster or a natural disaster affects the ability of the school district to comply
with the date requirement.
SECTION 6. ORS 326.726 is amended to read:
326.726. (1) The Department of Education shall designate a dyslexia specialist for the department
to provide school districts with support and resources that are necessary to:
(a) Assist students with dyslexia and their families; and
(b) Comply with the requirements of this section.
(2) Each school district shall ensure that at least one kindergarten through grade five teacher
in each kindergarten through grade five school has received training related to dyslexia. The
training must comply with the requirements described in subsection (3) of this section.
(3) For the purpose of subsection (2) of this section, a training opportunity related to dyslexia
must:
(a) Comply with the knowledge and practice standards of an international organization on
dyslexia;
(b) Enable the teacher to understand and recognize dyslexia; and
(c) Enable the teacher to implement instruction that is systematic, explicit and evidence-based
to meet the educational needs of students with dyslexia.
(4) The department shall annually develop a list of training opportunities related to dyslexia that
satisfy the requirements described in subsection (3) of this section. The list must:
(a) Be developed in collaboration with the Teacher Standards and Practices Commission to en-
sure that the training opportunities also satisfy professional development requirements; and
(b) Include at least one opportunity that is provided entirely online.
(5) Each school district shall ensure that every student is screened for risk factors of dyslexia
using a screening test identified by the department when the student is in:
(a) Kindergarten, if the student first enrolls at a public school in this state for kindergarten; or
(b) First grade, if the student first enrolls in a public school in this state for first grade.
(6) For the purpose of subsection (5) of this section, the department shall:
(a) Identify screening tests that are cost effective. The tests administered to students in
kindergarten must take into account the following factors:
(A) Phonological awareness;
(B) Rapid naming skills;
(C) The correspondence between sounds and letters; and
(D) Family history of difficulty in learning to read, if the student shows risk factors for reading
difficulties, including dyslexia.
(b) Provide guidance for notifications to be sent by school districts to parents of students who
are identified as having risk factors for reading difficulties, including dyslexia.
(7) The department shall develop guidance regarding best practices for assisting students who
are identified through screening or through parental input as showing risk factors or being at risk
for reading difficulties, including dyslexia. The department shall make the guidance available to
[5]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
school districts.
(8)(a) A school district [that does not comply] is not in noncompliance with the requirements
of subsection (2) of this section [and that does not secure] if the school district secures a waiver
from the department within the time required by the State Board of Education by rule [is considered
nonstandard under ORS 327.158].
(b) The board shall adopt by rule the criteria for a waiver from the requirements of subsection
(2) of this section to address instances when noncompliance is outside the control of the school
district.
SECTION 7. ORS 327.006 is amended to read:
327.006. As used in ORS 327.006 to 327.173, 327.348, 327.356 to 327.359 and 327.731.
(1) “Aggregate days membership” means the sum of days present and absent, according to the
rules of the State Board of Education, of all resident pupils when school is actually in session during
a certain period. The aggregate days membership of kindergarten pupils shall be calculated on the
basis of a half-day program for half-day kindergarten and on the basis of a full-day program for
full-day kindergarten.
(2)(a) “Approved transportation costs” means those costs as defined by rule of the State Board
of Education and is limited to those costs attributable to transporting or room and board provided
in lieu of transporting:
(A) Elementary school students who live at least one mile from school;
(B) Secondary school students who live at least 1.5 miles from school;
(C) Any student required to be transported for health or safety reasons, according to supple-
mental plans from districts that have been approved by the state board identifying students who are
required to be transported for health or safety reasons, including special education;
(D) Preschool children with disabilities requiring transportation for early intervention services
provided pursuant to ORS 343.224 and 343.533;
(E) Students who require payment of room and board in lieu of transportation;
(F) A student transported from one school or facility to another school or facility when the
student attends both schools or facilities during the day or week; and
(G) Students participating in school-sponsored field trips that are extensions of classroom
learning experiences.
(b) “Approved transportation costs” does not include the cost of constructing boarding school
facilities.
(3) “Average daily membership” or “ADM” means the aggregate days membership of a school
during a certain period divided by the number of days the school was actually in session during the
same period. However, if a district school board adopts a class schedule that operates throughout
the year for all or any schools in the district, average daily membership shall be computed by the
Department of Education so that the resulting average daily membership will not be higher or lower
than if the board had not adopted such schedule.
(4) “Kindergarten” means a kindergarten program that conforms to the standards and rules
adopted by the State Board of Education.
(5) “Net operating expenditures” means the sum of expenditures of a school district in
kindergarten through grade 12 for administration, instruction, attendance and health services, op-
eration of plant, maintenance of plant, fixed charges and tuition for resident students attending in
another district, as determined in accordance with the rules of the State Board of Education, but
net operating expenditures does not include transportation, food service, student body activities,
[6]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
community services, capital outlay, debt service or expenses incurred for nonresident students.
(6)(a) “Resident pupil” means any pupil:
(A) Whose legal school residence is within the boundaries of a school district reporting the pu-
pil, if the district is legally responsible for the education of the pupil, except that “resident pupil”
does not include a pupil who pays tuition or for whom the parent pays tuition or for whom the
district does not pay tuition for placement outside the district; or
(B) Whose legal residence is not within the boundaries of the district reporting the pupil but
who attends school in the district with the written consent of the district school board where the
school is located as provided by ORS 339.133 (5)(a).
(b) A pupil is not considered to be a resident pupil under paragraph (a)(A) of this subsection if
the pupil is attending school in another school district pursuant to a contract under ORS 339.125
and in the prior year was considered to be a resident pupil in another school district under para-
graph (a)(B) of this subsection. The pupil shall continue to be considered a resident of another
school district under paragraph (a)(B) of this subsection.
(c) A pupil is not considered to be a resident pupil under paragraph (a)(B) of this subsection if
the pupil is attending school in a school district pursuant to ORS 339.133 (5)(a) and in the prior year
was considered to be a resident pupil under paragraph (a)(A) of this subsection because the pupil
was attending school in another school district pursuant to a contract under ORS 339.125. The pupil
shall continue to be considered a resident pupil under paragraph (a)(A) of this subsection.
(d) “Resident pupil” includes a pupil who is:
(A) Admitted to a school district under ORS 339.115 (7); or
(B) Considered a resident under ORS 339.133 (5)(b).
[(7) “Standard school” means a school meeting the standards set by the rules of the State Board
of Education.]
[(8)] (7) “Tax” and “taxes” includes all taxes on property, excluding exempt bonded indebt-
edness, as those terms are defined in ORS 310.140.
SECTION 8. ORS 327.161 is amended to read:
327.161. (1) [Any] Every school district [that does not] must offer education programs in
kindergarten through grade 12 [shall be considered nonstandard under ORS 327.158]. A school dis-
trict may satisfy the requirements of this section by offering half-day kindergarten or full-day
kindergarten.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, a school district is not [considered to be non-
standard under ORS 327.158] in noncompliance with this section if the school district:
(a) Is not required to merge under section 2 (3) or (4), chapter 393, Oregon Laws 1991.
(b) Meets all of the following requirements:
(A) The school district offered education programs in kindergarten through grade 12 on Sep-
tember 1, 1996;
(B) After September 1, 1996, a majority of the board of the school district voted not to offer
education programs in grades 9 through 12; and
(C) The school district merges with a unified school district and the merger takes effect under
ORS 330.103 within one year after the vote of the board under this paragraph.
(c) Is a union high school district, as defined in ORS 330.005.
SECTION 9. ORS 327.162 is amended to read:
327.162. (1) The State Board of Education shall adopt by rule requirements for the process that
a school district must use when the school district receives a complaint pertaining to whether [a
[7]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
school in the district is a standard school as defined in ORS 327.006] the school district is in
compliance with a state or federal law or with a standard, as prescribed by ORS 327.158.
(2) The rules adopted by the board shall require school districts to establish and implement a
process for the prompt resolution of a complaint and shall require the process to:
(a) Have specific timelines for the completion of the process by both the district and the person
making the complaint;
(b) Have a specific time period within which the district must make a final decision on a com-
plaint, after which the final decision on the complaint may be appealed to the Superintendent of
Public Instruction; and
(c) Recognize that if a district does not provide a written decision within the specific time pe-
riod, failure to provide such a decision will be regarded as the district’s final decision.
SECTION 10. ORS 328.205 is amended to read:
328.205. (1) Common and union high school districts may contract a bonded indebtedness for any
one or more of the following purposes for the district:
(a) To acquire, construct, reconstruct, improve, repair, equip or furnish a school building or
school buildings or additions thereto;
(b) To fund or refund the removal or containment of asbestos substances in school buildings and
for repairs made necessary by such removal or containment;
(c) To acquire or to improve all property, real and personal, to be used for district purposes,
including school buses;
(d) To fund or refund outstanding indebtedness; and
(e) To provide for the payment of the debt.
(2) [However, when a common or union high school district is found under ORS 327.158 not to be
a standard school or when a school district is operating a conditionally standard school under ORS
327.158 (3), the school district] Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, a school district
that has been found to be in noncompliance under ORS 327.158 may contract a bonded indebt-
edness only for the purposes enumerated in subsection (1) of this section that are approved by the
Superintendent of Public Instruction pursuant to rules of the State Board of Education.
(3) The school district may use the proceeds received from the sale of school district bonds to
pay for any costs incurred by the school district in authorizing, issuing, carrying or repaying the
bonds, including, but not limited to, attorney, consultant, paying agent, trustee or other professional
fees and the cost of publishing notices of bond elections, printing such bonds and advertising such
bonds for sale.
SECTION 11. ORS 329.496 is amended to read:
329.496. (1)(a) Every public school student in kindergarten through grade five, and every public
school student in grade six at a school that teaches kindergarten through grade six, shall participate
in physical education for the entire school year for at least 150 minutes during each school week.
(b) Except as provided by paragraph (a) of this subsection, every public school student in grades
six through eight shall participate in physical education for at least an average of 150 minutes
during each school week, as calculated over the duration of a school year.
(c) Notwithstanding the time requirements established by paragraphs (a) and (b) of this sub-
section, the State Board of Education shall adopt rules that prorate the time requirements for:
(A) School weeks with scheduled school closures, including closures for holidays, inservice days
and days scheduled for parent-teacher conferences;
(B) School weeks with unscheduled school closures, including closures for inclement weather
[8]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
and emergencies;
(C) School weeks with out-of-school activities that occur during usual school hours, including
field trips and outdoor school programs;
(D) Part-time school programs, including half-day kindergarten; and
(E) Irregular class schedules, including class schedules based on a four-day week.
(d) School districts and public charter schools are not required to comply with the time re-
quirements established by paragraphs (a) and (b) of this subsection for school years during the
biennium in which the total amounts appropriated or allocated to the State School Fund and avail-
able for distribution to school districts are less than the amounts determined to be needed for school
districts through the State School Fund under the tentative budget prepared as provided by ORS
291.210. After the beginning of a biennium, a school district or a public charter school may cease
to comply with the time requirements established by paragraphs (a) and (b) of this subsection if the
amounts appropriated or allocated to the State School Fund and available for distribution to school
districts are less than the amounts determined to be needed for distribution through the State
School Fund, as calculated under ORS 291.210.
(2) School districts and public charter schools shall offer instruction in physical education that
meets the academic content standards for physical education adopted by the State Board of Educa-
tion under ORS 329.045. The instruction shall be a sequential, developmentally appropriate curric-
ulum that is designed, implemented and evaluated to help students develop the knowledge, motor
skills, self-management skills, attitudes and confidence needed to adopt and maintain physical ac-
tivity throughout their lives.
(3)(a) School districts and public charter schools shall devote at least 50 percent of physical
education class time to actual physical activity in each school week, with as much class time as
possible spent in moderate physical activity.
(b)(A) For the purpose of satisfying the time requirements established by subsection (1)(a) of this
section, school districts and public charter schools may provide up to 45 minutes of activities during
each school week that:
(i) Meet the academic content standards for physical education adopted by the State Board of
Education under ORS 329.045;
(ii) Are provided for students by a teacher whose license allows the teacher to provide instruc-
tion in physical education to those students, even if the teacher does not have a physical education
endorsement; and
(iii) Have been reviewed by a licensed teacher with a physical education endorsement.
(B) The Department of Education shall:
(i) Review and, as appropriate, approve activities that are developed by nonprofit professional
organizations representing health and physical education educators if the activities meet the re-
quirements of subparagraph (A) of this paragraph; and
(ii) Make available to school districts and public charter schools a list of activities approved
as provided by this subparagraph.
(C) School districts and public charter schools may provide activities that meet the requirements
of subparagraph (A) of this paragraph even if the activities are not approved as provided by sub-
paragraph (B) of this paragraph.
(4)(a) Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (3) of this section, a student with disabilities shall
have suitably adapted physical education incorporated as part of the individualized education pro-
gram developed for the student under ORS 343.151.
[9]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
(b) Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (3) of this section, a student who does not have an in-
dividualized education program but has chronic health problems, other disabling conditions or other
special needs that preclude the student from participating in regular physical education instruction
shall have suitably adapted physical education incorporated as part of an individualized health plan
developed for the student by the school district or public charter school.
(5) School districts and public charter schools shall assess school curricula at regular intervals
to measure the attainment of the minimum number of minutes that students are required to partic-
ipate in physical education under this section.
(6)(a) All teachers of physical education for public school students in kindergarten through
grade eight shall be adequately prepared and shall regularly participate in professional development
activities to effectively deliver the physical education program.
(b)(A) Notwithstanding any licensing or endorsement requirements established by the Teacher
Standards and Practices Commission, a teacher with an elementary multiple subject endorsement
may instruct students in activities described in subsection (3)(b) of this section if the activities are
reviewed by a licensed teacher with a physical education endorsement.
(B) A teacher described in this paragraph may provide instruction in activities described in
subsection (3)(b) of this section to students who are not regularly taught by the teacher as long as
the instruction in the activities to students who are not regularly taught by the teacher does not
exceed 45 minutes during each school week. Nothing in this subparagraph allows a school district
to employ a teacher for the sole purpose of providing instruction in activities described in sub-
section (3)(b) of this section.
[(7) A school district that does not comply with the requirements of this section is considered to
be nonstandard under ORS 327.158.]
(7) A school district is not in noncompliance with the requirements of this section if the
school district secures a waiver from the Superintendent of Public Instruction under sub-
section (8) of this section.
(8)(a) [Notwithstanding subsection (7) of this section and] Pursuant to rules adopted by the State
Board of Education, the Superintendent of Public Instruction may grant a waiver of the require-
ments of this section to a school district or a public charter school if the superintendent finds that
the school district or public charter school is unable to meet the requirements because of a
human-created disaster or a natural disaster.
(b) A waiver granted under this subsection may be:
(A) In whole or in part of the requirements prescribed by this section; and
(B) Granted for only one school year, but may be renewed for subsequent school years based
on rules adopted by the board if the school district or public charter school continues to be im-
pacted by the disaster.
SECTION 12. ORS 332.155 is amended to read:
332.155. A district school board:
(1) May furnish, equip, repair, lease, purchase and build schoolhouses, including high schools,
junior high schools, career and technical education schools, gymnasiums, houses for teachers and
other employees and like buildings, and locate, buy and lease lands for all school purposes. Leases
authorized by this subsection include lease-purchase agreements under which the district may ac-
quire ownership of the leased property at a nominal price. Leases and lease-purchase agreements
may be for a term of up to 30 years.
(2) May contract for the removal or containment of asbestos substances in school buildings and
[10]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
for repairs made necessary by the removal or containment. Contracts authorized by this section may
be for a term exceeding one year.
(3) May construct or cooperate in the construction of facilities for educator preparation pro-
viders on state or district owned lands, for any public university listed in ORS 352.002 that is in or
contiguous to the district, and to expend district funds for those activities.
(4) May acquire personal property by a lease-purchase agreement or contract of purchase for a
term exceeding one year. A lease-purchase agreement is one in which the rent payable by the dis-
trict is expressly agreed to have been established to reflect the savings resulting from the exemption
from taxation, and the district is entitled to ownership of the property at a nominal or other price
that is stated or determinable by the terms of the agreement and was not intended to reflect the true
value of the property.
(5) May lease, sell and convey all property of the district as may not, in the judgment of the
district school board, be required for school purposes.
(6) May sell property of the district in transactions whereby the district has the right to lease,
occupy or reacquire the property following the sale or have facilities constructed on the property
or furnished to the specifications of the district. The construction or furnishing of the facilities shall
be subject to:
(a) ORS chapter 279A, except ORS 279A.125 and 279A.250 to 279A.290;
(b) ORS chapter 279B, except ORS 279B.235, 279B.240, 279B.270, 279B.275 and 279B.280; and
(c) ORS 279C.005, 279C.100 to 279C.125 and 279C.300 to 279C.470.
(7) Shall furnish the schools with supplies, equipment, apparatus and services essential to
meeting the requirements of a standard school district as prescribed by ORS 327.158 and may
furnish other supplies, equipment, apparatus and services as the board considers advisable.
(8) May construct, purchase or lease in cooperation with other school districts or community
college districts facilities for secondary career and technical education programs for pupils of more
than one district and may furnish or cooperate in furnishing supplies and equipment for the facili-
ties, to be financed in the same manner as other school buildings and supplies are financed.
(9) May purchase real property upon a contractual basis when the period of time allowed for
payment under the contract does not exceed 30 years.
(10) May purchase relocatable classrooms and other relocatable structures in installment
transactions in which deferred installments of the purchase price are payable over not more than
10 years from the date the property is delivered to the district for occupancy and are secured by a
security interest in such property. Transactions under this subsection may take the form of, but are
not limited to, lease-purchase agreements.
(11) May enter into rental or lease-purchase agreements covering motor vehicles operated by the
district.
(12) May enter into transactions that are expected to reduce the cost to the district for school
facilities, including:
(a) Entering into an agreement or taking any other action to allow the district to use state or
federal tax credits or state or federal funding sources;
(b) Entering into a lease or sublease, partnership agreement or other contract for property that
is financed with general obligation bond proceeds or other district funds; or
(c) Loaning or otherwise contributing general obligation bond proceeds or other district funds
to transactions authorized by this subsection.
SECTION 13. ORS 335.090 is amended to read:
[11]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
335.090. (1) The high school education of all children of school age resident within a school
district that does not operate a high school or that is not a component part of a union high school
district shall be the responsibility of the district.
(2) The district shall pay the tuition of all pupils resident within the district who are qualified
to attend and are attending a [standard] public high school either within or outside the state.
(3) The district shall provide for transportation to the nearest [standard] public high school
which pupils may attend.
Reasonable board and room may be furnished instead of transportation
if desired. If the district arranges for the attendance of pupils at a [standard] public high school
other than the nearest one pupils may attend, then the district shall provide for transportation to
the [standard] public high school which the pupils are attending.
(4) The estimated cost of tuition and transportation or board and room instead of transportation
shall be included in and be a part of the budget and shall be levied as provided in ORS 335.095.
SECTION 14. ORS 336.580 is amended to read:
336.580. (1) Every child at a youth care center, as defined in ORS 420.855, is entitled to receive
appropriate education suited to the needs of the child in the least restrictive environment in which
the child can function until the child is no longer of compulsory school age or receives a high school
diploma or an equivalent.
(2)(a) Except as provided by paragraph (b) of this subsection, the school district in which the
youth care center is located shall develop an educational plan for the children in the youth care
center in consultation with the director of the center.
The plan shall be approved annually by the
school district board.
(b) For children placed at a youth care center within a detention facility, as defined in ORS
419A.004, the children shall receive educational services through the Juvenile Detention Education
Program as described in ORS 326.695.
(3) The Superintendent of Public Instruction shall have the authority to enforce the provisions
of ORS 336.575 and 339.137 and this section. [If a district fails to comply, the superintendent shall find
the district deficient and shall apply the penalty provided in ORS 327.158.]
(4) The State Board of Education shall adopt rules to implement this section.
SECTION 15. ORS 336.665 is amended to read:
336.665. (1) [The Superintendent of Public Instruction shall find a school district to be deficient
within the meaning of ORS 327.158 if the district fails to] A school district must cause the proposal
of alternative programs to be made under ORS 339.250 (5)(h) or (7)(c)(B).
(2) The failure to cause the proposal of alternative programs [shall not be] is not grounds for
a civil action against the school district.
SECTION 16. ORS 339.297 is amended to read:
339.297. (1) Each entity that has jurisdiction over a public education program must prepare and
submit to the Department of Education an annual report detailing the use of restraint and seclusion
for the preceding school year, including, at a minimum:
(a) The total number of incidents involving restraint.
(b) The total number of incidents involving seclusion.
(c) The total number of seclusions in a locked room.
(d) The total number of rooms available for use by the public education program for seclusion
of a student and a description of the dimensions and design of the rooms.
(e) The total number of students placed in restraint.
(f) The total number of students placed in seclusion.
[12]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
(g) The total number of incidents that resulted in injuries or death to students or personnel as
a result of the use of restraint or seclusion.
(h) The number of students who were placed in restraint or seclusion more than 10 times in the
course of a school year and an explanation of what steps have been taken by the public education
program to decrease the use of restraint and seclusion for each student.
(i) The number of incidents in which the personnel of the public education program administer-
ing restraint or seclusion were not trained as provided by ORS 339.300.
(j) The demographic characteristics of all students upon whom restraint or seclusion was im-
posed, including race, ethnicity, gender, disability status, migrant status, English proficiency and
status as economically disadvantaged, unless the demographic information would reveal personally
identifiable information about an individual student.
(2)(a) Each entity that has jurisdiction over a public education program shall make its annual
report about restraint and seclusion available to:
(A) The public at the entity’s main office and the website of the entity;
(B) The board or governing body overseeing the entity;
(C) If the entity is an education service district, the component school districts of the education
service district; and
(D) If the entity is a public charter school, the sponsor of the public charter school.
(b) Parents and guardians of students in a public education program shall be advised at least
once each school year about how to access the report.
[(3) A public education provider that does not comply with the requirement to submit a report to
the Department of Education under subsection (1) of this section or to make the report available as
described in subsection (2) of this section is considered nonstandard under ORS 327.158.]
SECTION 17. ORS 339.343 is amended to read:
339.343. (1) This section shall be known and may be cited as Adi’s Act.
(2) In accordance with rules adopted by the State Board of Education in consultation with the
Oregon Health Authority, each school district shall adopt a policy requiring a comprehensive dis-
trict plan on student suicide prevention for students in kindergarten through grade 12.
(3) A plan required under this section must include:
(a) Procedures relating to suicide prevention, intervention and activities that reduce risk and
promote healing after a suicide;
(b) Identification of the school officials responsible for responding to reports of suicidal risk;
(c) A procedure by which a person may request a school district to review the actions of a
school in responding to suicidal risk;
(d) Methods to address the needs of high-risk groups, including:
(A) Youth bereaved by suicide;
(B) Youth with disabilities, mental illness or substance use disorders;
(C) Youth experiencing homelessness or out-of-home settings, such as foster care; and
(D) Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and other minority gender identities and sexual
orientations;
(e) A description of, and materials for, any training to be provided to school employees as part
of the plan, which must include:
(A) When and how to refer youth and their families to appropriate mental health services; and
(B) Programs that can be completed through self-review of suitable suicide prevention materials;
and
[13]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
(f) Any other requirement prescribed by the State Board of Education by rule, based on con-
sultations with state and national suicide prevention organizations, suicide experts and school-based
mental health providers, and based on reviews of national models.
(4) A school district may consult with state or national suicide prevention organizations, the
Department of Education, school-based mental health professionals, parents, guardians, school em-
ployees, students, administrators and school board associations when developing the plan required
under this section.
(5) The plan required under this section:
(a) Must be written to ensure that a school employee acts only within the authorization and
scope of the employee’s credentials or licenses. Nothing in this section shall be construed as au-
thorizing or encouraging a school employee to diagnose or treat mental illness unless the employee
is specifically licensed and employed to do so.
(b) Must be:
(A) Made available annually to the community of the school district, including students of the
school district, parents and guardians of students of the school district, and employees and volun-
teers of the school district.
(B) Readily available at the school district office and on the school district website, if applicable.
[(6) A school district that does not comply with the requirements of this section is considered to
be nonstandard under ORS 327.158.]
SECTION 18. ORS 339.356 is amended to read:
339.356. (1) Each school district shall adopt a policy prohibiting harassment, intimidation or
bullying and prohibiting cyberbullying. School districts shall develop the policy after consultation
with parents, guardians, school employees, volunteers, students, administrators and community rep-
resentatives.
(2) School districts must include in the policy:
(a) A statement prohibiting harassment, intimidation or bullying and prohibiting cyberbullying.
(b) Definitions of “harassment,” “intimidation” or “bullying” and of “cyberbullying” that are
consistent with ORS 339.351.
(c) Definitions of “protected class” that are consistent with ORS 174.100 and 339.351.
(d) A statement of the scope of the policy, including a notice that the policy applies to behavior
at school-sponsored activities, on school-provided transportation and at any official school bus stop.
(e) A description of the type of behavior expected from each student.
(f) A procedure that is uniform throughout the school district for reporting an act of harassment,
intimidation or bullying or an act of cyberbullying. A procedure established under this paragraph
shall:
(A) Identify by job title the school officials responsible for receiving such a report at a school.
(B) Require a school employee to report an act of harassment, intimidation or bullying or an act
of cyberbullying to a person identified under subparagraph (A) of this paragraph.
(C) Require the school official identified under subparagraph (A) of this paragraph to notify the
parents or guardians of a student who was subjected to an act of harassment, intimidation or
bullying or an act of cyberbullying and the parents or guardians of a student who may have con-
ducted an act of harassment, intimidation or bullying or an act of cyberbullying. Notification must
occur with involvement and consideration of the needs and concerns of the student who was sub-
jected to an act of harassment, intimidation or bullying or an act of cyberbullying. For the purposes
of this subparagraph:
[14]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
(i) Notification is not required under this subparagraph if the school official reasonably believes
notification could endanger the student who was subjected to an act of harassment, intimidation or
bullying or an act of cyberbullying or if all of the following occur:
(I) The student who was subjected to an act of harassment, intimidation or bullying or an act
of cyberbullying requests that notification not be provided to the student’s parents or guardians;
(II) The school official determines that notification is not in the best interest of the student who
was subjected to an act of harassment, intimidation or bullying or an act of cyberbullying; and
(III) The school official informs the student that federal law may require the student’s parents
or guardians to have access to the student’s education record, including any requests made as pro-
vided by this sub-subparagraph.
(ii) If the school official does not make the determination described in sub-subparagraph (i)(II)
of this subparagraph, the school official must inform the student of that determination prior to pro-
viding notification.
(iii) When notification is provided under this subparagraph, the notification must occur:
(I) Within a reasonable period of time; or
(II) Promptly, for acts that caused physical harm to the student.
(D) Identify any remedial action that may be imposed on a school employee for failure to make
a report as required by subparagraph (B) of this paragraph.
(E) Allow a student or volunteer to report an act of harassment, intimidation or bullying or an
act of cyberbullying voluntarily and anonymously to a person identified under subparagraph (A) of
this paragraph. Nothing in this subparagraph may be construed to permit remedial action solely on
the basis of an anonymous report.
(g) A procedure that is uniform throughout the school district for prompt investigation of a re-
port of an act of harassment, intimidation or bullying or an act of cyberbullying. A procedure es-
tablished under this paragraph shall identify by job title the school officials responsible for
investigating such a report.
(h) A procedure by which a person may request a school district to review the actions of a
school in responding to a report of an act of harassment, intimidation or bullying or an act of
cyberbullying or investigating such a report.
(i) A statement of the manner in which a school and a school district will respond after an act
of harassment, intimidation or bullying or an act of cyberbullying is reported, investigated and, if
applicable, confirmed.
(j) A statement of the consequences and appropriate remedial action for a person found to have
committed an act of harassment, intimidation or bullying or an act of cyberbullying.
(k) A statement prohibiting reprisal or retaliation against any person who reports an act of
harassment, intimidation or bullying or an act of cyberbullying and stating the consequences and
appropriate remedial action for a person who engages in such reprisal or retaliation.
(L) A statement of the consequences and appropriate remedial action for a person found to have
falsely accused another of having committed an act of harassment, intimidation or bullying or an
act of cyberbullying as a means of reprisal or retaliation, as a means of harassment, intimidation
or bullying or as a means of cyberbullying.
(m) A statement of how the policy is to be publicized within the district. At a minimum, a school
district shall make the policy:
(A) Annually available to parents, guardians, school employees and students in a student or
employee handbook; and
[15]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
(B) Readily available to parents, guardians, school employees, volunteers, students, administra-
tors and community representatives at each school office or at the school district office and, if
available, on the website for a school or the school district.
(n) The identification by job title of school officials and school district officials responsible for
ensuring that the policy is implemented.
[(3) A school district that does not comply with the requirements of this section is considered non-
standard under ORS 327.158.]
SECTION 19. ORS 343.328 is amended to read:
343.328. (1)(a) A parent or a foster parent may, at any time, revoke consent for the placement
of a student with a disability on an abbreviated school day program.
(b) Consent for the abbreviated school day program placement shall be considered revoked if,
at any time, the parent or the foster parent revokes the consent, in writing, to an abbreviated school
day program placement or makes a written objection to the abbreviated school day program place-
ment.
(c) Upon receipt of a written revocation or objection to the abbreviated school day program
placement, the school district superintendent shall ensure that, within five school days or by a later
date specified in a written notice provided by the parent or foster parent, the student has meaningful
access to the same number of hours of instruction and educational services that are provided to the
majority of other students who are in the same grade within the student’s resident school district.
(d) Notwithstanding paragraph (c) of this subsection, a parent or foster parent of a student may
allow the school district superintendent to have an extension of an additional five school days to
ensure that the student has meaningful access to the same number of hours of instruction and edu-
cational services that are provided to the majority of other students who are in the same grade
within the student’s resident school district if:
(A) The parent or foster parent provides written consent for the extension;
(B) The parent or foster parent has not previously provided written consent for an extension for
the student during the school year;
(C) The written consent states that the parent or foster parent understands that the parent or
foster parent is not required to give consent for the extension and that the refusal to give consent
for the extension will not result in adverse actions being taken against the student; and
(D) The school district provides to the parent or foster parent, in writing and in a language and
format accessible to the parent or foster parent, the specific reasons why the extension is needed.
(e) If a school district fails to provide meaningful access before the expiration of an extension
allowed under paragraph (d) of this subsection, any calculations of compensatory education that
must be provided by the school district will be made as though an extension had not been allowed.
(f) If a student is on an abbreviated school day program on the last day of the school year and
the student’s parent or foster parent makes a written objection to the abbreviated school day pro-
gram placement or revokes consent for the abbreviated school day program placement at least 14
calendar days prior to the beginning of the next school year, the student shall, beginning on the first
day of the new school year, be provided with meaningful access to the same number of hours of in-
struction and educational services that are provided to the majority of other students who are in
the same grade within the student’s resident school district.
(2)(a) When the Department of Education receives a complaint or otherwise has cause to believe
a school district is not in compliance with ORS 343.322 (7) and 343.324 (5), the department must in-
itiate an investigation and inform the school district of any noncompliance within 30 calendar days
[16]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
of receiving the complaint or having cause to believe the school district is not in compliance.
(b) If a complaint described in paragraph (a) of this subsection relates to a specific student and
is submitted by the student’s parent or foster parent, the Superintendent of Public Instruction is not
required to conduct an investigation and shall:
(A) Presume that consent for the abbreviated school day program placement has been revoked.
(B) Immediately, and in no case no more than two business days after receipt of the complaint,
order the school district to provide to the student, within five school days, meaningful access to the
same number of hours of instruction and educational services that are provided to the majority of
other students who are in the same grade within the student’s resident school district. For the
purpose of this subparagraph, “business day” has the meaning given that term in ORS 192.311.
(C) Find the school district is not in compliance with ORS 343.322 (7) and 343.324 (5) if the
school district fails to comply with the order described in subparagraph (B) of this paragraph and
the parent or foster parent has not granted written consent for an extension as described in sub-
section (1)(d) of this section.
(c) If the superintendent finds that a school district is not in compliance with ORS 343.322 (7)
and 343.324 (5), either after an investigation or as provided by paragraph (b) of this subsection, the
superintendent shall:
(A) Enter an order that any students named in the complaint or identified in the course of an
investigation initiated under paragraph (a) of this subsection who are placed on an abbreviated
school day program in violation of ORS 343.322 (7) and 343.324 (5) be provided, within five school
days of the final order, with meaningful access to the same number of hours of instruction and ed-
ucational services that are provided to the majority of other students who are in the same grade
within the student’s resident school district.
(B) If the school district fails to comply with the order described in subparagraph (A) of this
paragraph within five school days, find the school district [nonstandard] to be in noncompliance
under ORS 327.158 or 334.217 until all students subject to the order and placed on an abbreviated
school day program in violation of ORS 343.322 (7) and 343.324 (5) are provided with meaningful
access to the same number of hours of instruction and educational services that are provided to the
majority of other students who are in the same grade within the student’s resident school district.
(C) If the school district fails to comply with the order described in subparagraph (A) of this
paragraph within 10 school days and notwithstanding any timelines or process requirements of ORS
327.158 or 334.217, immediately withhold State School Fund moneys that otherwise would be dis-
tributed to the school district. Amounts withheld must be calculated based on the weighted average
daily membership attributable to the students subject to the order, as calculated under ORS 327.013,
and the percentage of the school year that the students were placed on an abbreviated school day
program in violation of ORS 343.322 (7) and 343.324 (5).
(D) Require the school district to provide compensatory education to the students subject to the
order that is equivalent to at least one hour of direct instruction for every two hours of instruction
that were lost due to an abbreviated school day program placement in violation of ORS 343.322 (7)
and 343.324 (5).
(3) The failure of a school district superintendent to restore meaningful access to a student
within the time required by ORS 343.326 (3)(b)(B) or subsection (1)(c) or (d) of this section or to
comply with an order issued under subsection (2)(c) of this section to restore meaningful access to
all students subject to the order may be grounds for discipline by the Teacher Standards and Prac-
tices Commission under ORS 342.175. If the commission receives a complaint concerning a failure
[17]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
described in this subsection, the commission shall take into consideration the responsive efforts and
actions of the superintendent to restore meaningful access to the student or students.
SECTION 20. ORS 334.217 is amended to read:
334.217 (1) All education service districts of this state are expected to fully comply with
the requirements of state and federal law to be considered a standard education service dis-
trict.
[(1)] (2) In addition to the requirements prescribed by subsection (1) of this section, the
State Board of Education by rule shall establish standards to determine the adequacy of services
and facilities provided by the education service districts. In establishing [such] the standards, the
state board shall consider the most economic method of providing services and facilities, the quality
of the services and facilities according to the best educational standards, and the needs of the stu-
dents.
[(2)] (3) When the Superintendent of Public Instruction determines pursuant to rule that an ed-
ucation service district is [nonstandard] not in compliance with a state or federal law or with
a standard, the district [designated nonstandard] shall file a plan to [meet standards] come into
compliance over a specified period of time. The Superintendent of Public Instruction may accept,
reject or modify the plan and order the [nonstandard] district to comply with the plan as approved
by the superintendent. Once a plan is approved, the district shall be conditionally standard until
[all deficiencies are corrected] the district comes into compliance. If a district [corrects all defi-
ciencies] comes into compliance, the district shall be designated as standard. The district shall
have 180 days from the date the plan is accepted to [make all corrections] come into compliance.
After that time, the Superintendent of Public Instruction may impose sanctions on the district if the
district has not [made the necessary corrections] come into compliance.
[(3)] (4) The state board shall establish by rule appropriate sanctions for noncompliance. The
sanctions may include:
(a) Mandatory merger of the [nonstandard] education service district with a contiguous educa-
tion service district that is standard;
(b) The sanctions described in ORS 342.173, if applicable;
(c) The withholding of funds from the State School Fund;
(d) The removal of the superintendent of the education service district;
(e) The temporary governance of the education service district by the state board; or
(f) Dissolution of the education service district.
SECTION 21. ORS 334.217, as amended by section 32, chapter 406, Oregon Laws 2025, is
amended to read:
334.217. (1) All education service districts of this state are expected to fully comply with
the requirements of state and federal law to be considered a standard education service dis-
trict.
[(1)] (2) In addition to the requirements prescribed by subsection (1) of this section, the
State Board of Education by rule shall establish and enforce standards to determine the adequacy
of services and facilities provided by the education service districts. In establishing [such] the
standards, the state board shall:
(a) Consider the most economic method of providing services and facilities, the quality of the
services and facilities according to the best educational standards, and the needs of the students;
and
(b) Provide a process for a person who resides in the district, or a parent or guardian of a stu-
[18]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
dent who attends school in the district, to file a complaint about noncompliance with a state or
federal law or with a standard.
[(2)] (3) When the Superintendent of Public Instruction determines pursuant to rule that an ed-
ucation service district is [nonstandard] not in compliance with a state or federal law or with
a standard, the district [designated nonstandard] shall file a plan to [meet standards] come into
compliance over a specified period of time. The Superintendent of Public Instruction may accept,
reject or modify the plan and order the [nonstandard] district to comply with the plan as approved
by the superintendent. Once a plan is approved, the district shall be conditionally standard until
[all deficiencies are corrected] the district comes into compliance. If a district [corrects all defi-
ciencies] comes into compliance, the district shall be designated as standard. The district shall
have 180 days from the date the plan is accepted to [make all corrections] come into compliance.
After that time, the Superintendent of Public Instruction may impose sanctions on the district if the
district has not [made the necessary corrections] come into compliance.
[(3)] (4) The state board shall establish by rule appropriate sanctions for noncompliance. The
sanctions may include:
(a) Mandatory merger of the [nonstandard] education service district with a contiguous educa-
tion service district that is standard;
(b) The sanctions described in ORS 342.173, if applicable;
(c) The withholding of funds from the State School Fund;
(d) The removal of the superintendent of the education service district;
(e) The temporary governance of the education service district by the state board; or
(f) Dissolution of the education service district.
SECTION 22. The amendments to ORS 326.726, 327.006, 327.158, 327.161, 327.162, 328.205,
329.496, 332.155, 334.217, 335.090, 336.580, 336.665, 339.297, 339.343, 339.356 and 343.328 by
sections 5 to 21 of this 2026 Act become operative on July 1, 2026.
ABOLISHMENT OF OUTDATED METHOD FOR PREPARING A
REPORT ON PUBLIC EDUCATION APPROPRIATIONS
SECTION 23. ORS 171.857, 327.290, 327.497, 327.500, 327.502, 327.506, 329.015 and 329.025 are
repealed on January 1, 2027.
SECTION 24. ORS 327.185 is amended to read:
327.185. (1) As used in this section, “eligible applicant” means any of the following entities:
(a) Common school districts and union high school districts.
(b) The Youth Corrections Education Program or the Juvenile Detention Education Program.
(c) Public charter schools that are not virtual public charter schools, as defined in ORS 338.005,
and that have a student population of which:
(A) At least 35 percent of the student population is composed of students from the following
student groups:
(i) Economically disadvantaged, as described in ORS 327.164 (11)(a);
(ii) Racial or ethnic groups that have historically experienced academic disparities, as described
in ORS 327.164 (11)(b); or
(iii) Students with disabilities, as described in ORS 327.164 (11)(c); and
(B) The percentage of the students from student groups identified under subparagraph (A) of this
paragraph is greater than or equal to:
[19]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
(i) The percentage of all students in the school district who are economically disadvantaged, if
eligibility is determined based on the percentage of students who are economically disadvantaged;
(ii) The percentage of all students in the school district who are from racial or ethnic groups
that have historically experienced academic disparities, if eligibility is determined based on the
percentage of students who are from those racial or ethnic groups; or
(iii) The percentage of all students in the school district who are disabled, if eligibility is de-
termined based on the percentage of students who are disabled.
(d) The Oregon School for the Deaf.
(e) The school district or education service district that is providing the educational services for
an eligible day treatment program or an eligible residential treatment program for which payment
of the costs of education is provided as described in ORS 343.961 (2).
(2)(a) Eligible applicants may apply for a grant from the Student Investment Account to receive
a distribution under ORS 327.190.
(b) Notwithstanding ORS 338.155 (9), a public charter school that is not an eligible applicant
may not apply for a grant under this section.
(3) Prior to preparing a grant application, an eligible applicant must:
(a) If the eligible applicant is a school district, determine whether the school district will allow
public charter schools sponsored by, or located within, the school district to participate in the grant
application and the grant agreement.
(b) If the eligible applicant is a public charter school, determine whether the public charter
school intends to apply for a grant and provide notice of that intent to the school district in which
the public charter school is located and to the Department of Education.
(4)(a) If an eligible applicant is a school district and decides to include public charter schools
in the grant application and grant agreement, the school district must provide all public charter
schools sponsored by, or located within, the school district the opportunity to participate in the
grant application and grant agreement.
(b)(A) A public charter school is not required to participate in the grant application and grant
agreement of a school district.
(B) If a public charter school does not participate in a grant application and grant agreement
under this subsection:
(i) The ADMw of the public charter school may not be used in the calculation of the school
district ADMw for grants distributed under ORS 327.195; and
(ii) The public charter school is not entitled to any grant moneys distributed under ORS 327.195.
(C) If a public charter school participates in a grant application and grant agreement under this
subsection:
(i) The public charter school and school district shall enter into an agreement for the distrib-
ution of moneys or the provision of services, including any accountability measures required of the
public charter school by the school district;
(ii) The ADMw of the public charter school shall be used in the calculation of the school district
ADMw for grants distributed under ORS 327.195; and
(iii) The public charter school is entitled to any grant moneys or services provided for in the
agreement entered into under this subparagraph.
(5)(a) For the purpose of preparing a grant application, an eligible applicant must determine:
(A) Which of the allowed uses identified in ORS 327.180 (3) the eligible applicant will fund with
grant moneys; and
[20]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
(B) Which of the eligible uses identified under subparagraph (A) of this paragraph the eligible
applicant will designate to meeting student mental and behavioral health needs.
(b) An eligible applicant shall make the determinations required under paragraph (a) of this
subsection by:
(A) Engaging in strategic planning; and
(B) Considering the [recommendations of the Quality Education Commission established under
ORS 327.500 and] recommendations from the advisory groups formed by the Department of Educa-
tion for the purposes of the statewide education plans developed and implemented by the depart-
ment.
(6)(a) The strategic planning required under subsection (5) of this section must include:
(A) A completed needs assessment, as described in ORS 329.095;
(B) An analysis of the potential academic impact, both for the students of the eligible applicant
and for student groups identified in ORS 327.164 (11), from the allowed uses that would be funded
by grant moneys; and
(C) The creation of budgets for the allowed uses that would be funded by grant moneys.
(b) The strategic planning required under subsection (5) of this section must take into consid-
eration:
(A) Input from the community of the eligible applicant, including school employees, students
from student groups identified in ORS 327.164 (11) and parents of those students; and
(B) Data collected by the eligible applicant to enable the eligible applicant to make equity-based
decisions.
(7) Based on the strategic planning described in subsection (6) of this section, the eligible ap-
plicant shall develop a four-year plan for the use of grant moneys. The plan must be updated every
two years and must:
(a) Identify which allowed uses identified in ORS 327.180 (3) will be funded with grant moneys
and which of those uses will be designated to meet student mental and behavioral health needs.
(b) Describe how the allowed uses identified under paragraph (a) of this subsection will be used
to:
(A) Meet students’ mental and behavioral health needs;
(B) Increase academic achievement for students of the eligible applicant; and
(C) Reduce academic disparities for student groups identified in ORS 327.164 (11) who are served
by the eligible applicant, and identify which of those student groups will benefit from the allowed
uses that are being funded with grant moneys.
(c) Include the budgets for the allowed uses to be funded with grant moneys.
(d) Be approved by the governing body of the eligible applicant at an open meeting, following:
(A) Provision of the plan at the main office of the eligible applicant and on the eligible
applicant’s website;
(B) Oral presentation of the plan by an administrator of the eligible applicant to the governing
body of the eligible applicant; and
(C) Opportunity for the public to comment on the plan at an open meeting.
(e) Be a part of the local district continuous improvement plan described in ORS 329.095, if the
eligible applicant is a school district.
(8) To apply for a grant, an eligible applicant must submit an application every two years in a
format and according to timelines prescribed by the Department of Education. The application must
include:
[21]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
(a) A completed needs assessment, as described in ORS 329.095;
(b) The plan developed under subsection (7) of this section; and
(c) Budget estimates for each of the allowed uses identified in the plan developed under sub-
section (7) of this section that will be funded by grant moneys.
SECTION 25. ORS 327.297 is amended to read:
327.297. (1) In addition to those moneys distributed through the State School Fund, the Depart-
ment of Education shall award grants to school districts, education service districts, the Youth
Corrections Education Program and the Juvenile Detention Education Program for activities that
relate to increases in student achievement, including:
(a)
Early
childhood
support
including
establishing,
maintaining
or
expanding
quality
prekindergarten programs;
(b) Class size reduction with an emphasis on the reduction of kindergarten through grade three
class sizes;
(c) Increases in instructional time including summer programs and before- and after-school pro-
grams;
(d) Mentoring, teacher retention and professional development;
(e) Remediation, alternative learning and student retention;
(f) Services to at-risk youth;
(g) Programs to improve a student achievement gap between student groups identified by cul-
ture, poverty, language and race and other student groups;
(h) Vocational education programs;
(i) Literacy programs;
(j) School library programs; and
(k) Other research-based student improvement strategies approved by the State Board of Edu-
cation.
(2)(a) Each school district, each education service district, the Youth Corrections Education
Program and the Juvenile Detention Education Program may apply to the Department of Education
for a grant.
(b) The department shall review and approve applications based on criteria established by the
State Board of Education. [In establishing the criteria, the State Board of Education shall consider the
recommendations of the Quality Education Commission established under ORS 327.500.]
(c) The applications shall include the activities to be funded and the goals of the district or
program for increases in student performance. The applications shall become part of the local dis-
trict continuous improvement plan described in ORS 329.095.
(3)(a) Notwithstanding ORS 338.155 (9), the Department of Education may not award a grant
under this section directly to a public charter school.
(b) A school district that receives a grant under this section may transfer a portion of the grant
to a public charter school based on the charter of the school or any other agreement between the
school district and the public charter school.
(c) A public charter school that receives grant funds under this subsection shall use those funds
for the activities specified in subsection (1) of this section.
(4)(a) The amount of each grant for a program or school district = the program’s or school
district’s ADMw ×  (the total amount available for distribution to programs and school districts as
grants in each fiscal year ÷  the total ADMw of all programs and school districts that receive a
grant).
[22]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
(b) The amount of each grant for an education service district = the education service district’s
ADMw ×  (the total amount available for distribution to education service districts as grants in
each fiscal year ÷  the total ADMw of all education service districts that receive a grant).
(c) As used in this subsection, “ADMw” means:
(A) For a school district, the extended weighted average daily membership as calculated under
ORS 327.013, 338.155 (1) and 338.165 (2);
(B) For the Youth Corrections Education Program, the extended weighted average daily mem-
bership as calculated under ORS 327.026;
(C) For the Juvenile Detention Education Program, the extended weighted average daily mem-
bership as calculated under ORS 327.026; and
(D) For an education service district, the sum of the ADMw of the school districts located
within the territory of the education service district.
(5) Each district or program shall deposit the grant amounts it receives under this section in a
separate account, and shall apply amounts in that account to pay for activities described in the
district’s or program’s application.
(6) The State Board of Education may adopt any rules necessary for the administration of the
grant program.
SECTION 26. ORS 329.045 is amended to read:
329.045. (1)(a) In order to achieve the [goals contained in ORS 329.025] implementation of the
state educational standards established under ORS 326.051 (1)(a), the State Board of Education
shall regularly and periodically review and revise its Common Curriculum Goals, performance indi-
cators and diploma requirements.
(b) The review and revision conducted under this section shall:
(A) Include Essential Learning Skills and rigorous academic content standards in mathematics,
science, language arts, history, geography, economics, civics, higher education and career path
skills, personal financial education, physical education, health, the arts and world languages.
(B) Ensure that any revisions to the academic content standards for science, health, history,
geography, economics and civics include standards that address the causes and effects of climate
change and strategies for mitigating, adapting to and strengthening community resilience to those
causes and effects.
(C) Involve teachers and other educators, parents of students and other citizens and shall pro-
vide ample opportunity for public comment.
(D) Encourage increased learning time. As used in this subparagraph, “increased learning
time” means a schedule that encompasses a longer school day, week or year for the purpose of in-
creasing the total number of school hours available to provide:
(i) Students with instruction in core academic subjects, including mathematics, science, language
arts, history, geography, economics, civics, higher education and career path skills, personal finan-
cial education, the arts and world languages;
(ii) Students with instruction in subjects other than the subjects identified in sub-subparagraph
(i) of this subparagraph, including health and physical education;
(iii) Students with the opportunity to participate in enrichment activities that contribute to a
well-rounded education, including learning opportunities that may be based on service, experience
or work and that may be provided through partnerships with other organizations; and
(iv) Teachers with the opportunity to collaborate, plan and engage in professional development
within and across grades and subjects.
[23]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
(c) Nothing in this subsection prevents a school district or public charter school from main-
taining control over course content, format, materials and teaching methods.
(2) The State Board of Education shall continually review and revise all adopted academic con-
tent standards necessary for students to successfully transition to the next phase of their education.
(3)(a) School districts and public charter schools must offer students instruction in mathematics,
science, language arts, history, geography, economics, civics, higher education and career path
skills, personal financial education, physical education, health, the arts and world languages.
(b) Instruction required under paragraph (a) of this subsection must:
(A) Meet the academic content standards adopted by the State Board of Education; and
(B) Meet the requirements adopted by the State Board of Education and the board of the school
district or public charter school.
SECTION 27. ORS 329.045, as amended by section 1, chapter 202, Oregon Laws 2019, section
6, chapter 178, Oregon Laws 2021, section 1, chapter 328, Oregon Laws 2023, section 7, chapter 564,
Oregon Laws 2023, and section 2, chapter 445, Oregon Laws 2025, is amended to read:
329.045. (1)(a) In order to achieve the [goals contained in ORS 329.025] implementation of the
state educational standards established under ORS 326.051 (1)(a), the State Board of Education
shall regularly and periodically review and revise its Common Curriculum Goals, performance indi-
cators and diploma requirements.
(b) The review and revision conducted under this section shall:
(A) Include Essential Learning Skills and rigorous academic content standards in mathematics,
science, language arts, history, geography, economics, civics, higher education and career path
skills, personal financial education, physical education, health, the arts and world languages.
(B) Ensure that the academic content standards for history, geography, economics and civics
include sufficient instruction on the histories, contributions and perspectives of individuals who:
(i) Are Native American;
(ii) Are of African, Asian, Pacific Island, Chicano, Latino, Middle Eastern or Jewish descent;
(iii) Are women;
(iv) Have disabilities;
(v) Are immigrants or refugees; or
(vi) Are lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender.
(C) Ensure that any revisions to the academic content standards for science, health, history,
geography, economics and civics include standards that address the causes and effects of climate
change and strategies for mitigating, adapting to and strengthening community resilience to those
causes and effects.
(D) Involve teachers and other educators, parents of students and other citizens and shall pro-
vide ample opportunity for public comment.
(E) Encourage increased learning time. As used in this subparagraph, “increased learning
time” means a schedule that encompasses a longer school day, week or year for the purpose of in-
creasing the total number of school hours available to provide:
(i) Students with instruction in core academic subjects, including mathematics, science, language
arts, history, geography, economics, civics, higher education and career path skills, personal finan-
cial education, the arts and world languages;
(ii) Students with instruction in subjects other than the subjects identified in sub-subparagraph
(i) of this subparagraph, including health and physical education;
(iii) Students with the opportunity to participate in enrichment activities that contribute to a
[24]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
well-rounded education, including learning opportunities that may be based on service, experience
or work and that may be provided through partnerships with other organizations; and
(iv) Teachers with the opportunity to collaborate, plan and engage in professional development
within and across grades and subjects.
(c) Nothing in this subsection prevents a school district or public charter school from main-
taining control over course content, format, materials and teaching methods.
(2) The State Board of Education shall continually review and revise all adopted academic con-
tent standards necessary for students to successfully transition to the next phase of their education.
(3)(a) School districts and public charter schools must offer students instruction in mathematics,
science, language arts, history, geography, economics, civics, higher education and career path
skills, personal financial education, physical education, health, the arts and world languages.
(b) Instruction required under paragraph (a) of this subsection must:
(A) Meet the academic content standards adopted by the State Board of Education; and
(B) Meet the requirements adopted by the State Board of Education and the board of the school
district or public charter school.
SECTION 28. ORS 329.085 is amended to read:
329.085. (1) [To facilitate the attainment and successful implementation of educational standards
under ORS 326.051 (1)(a) and 329.025] To ensure that a school district is a standard school
district as described in ORS 327.158, the State Board of Education or its designee shall assess the
effectiveness of each public school, public charter school and school district. The findings of the
assessment shall be reported to the school or school district within six months.
(2) The board shall establish the standards, including standards of accessibility to educational
opportunities, upon which the assessment is based.
(3) On a periodic basis, the board shall review school and school district standards and credit
and performance requirements.
The board shall seek public input in this process.
SECTION 29. ORS 329.155 is amended to read:
329.155. (1) As used in this section:
(a) “Families” means groups of individuals related by blood, marriage or adoption, or individuals
whose functional relationships are similar to those found in such associations. The family’s purpose
is the security, support, nurturance, love, transmission of values and facilitation of each member’s
growth and development, and is the primary social unit affecting a child’s well-being.
(b) “Services” means education and all other programs and services addressing one or more of
a child’s basic needs.
(c) “Young children” means children prenatal through six years of age.
(2) State agencies that administer education programs and other programs that provide services
for children and families shall:
(a) Evaluate the effectiveness of the program as related to the principles stated in ORS [329.025
and] 417.305 in the earliest stages of the budget process, including components within programs as
appropriate;
(b) Articulate ways in which the program is:
(A) An effective component of agency and state priorities, goals and strategies that have been
established by the Early Learning Council; and
(B) Relevant to research and professional standards;
(c) Establish plans, interagency partnerships and implementation practices;
(d) Use the information generated by applicable state advisory groups and governing boards in
[25]
SB 1555
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
the program assessment of needs and decisions as to service delivery in a given community; and
(e) Identify barriers to improving program capability to serve the needs of young children and
make related recommendations, if any, to the Early Learning Council.
(3) The processes listed in subsection (2) of this section are for the purpose of generating
interagency coordination so as to serve to the greatest extent possible young children and their
families in a comprehensive and developmentally appropriate fashion. The information generated by
these processes shall be considered as a contribution to subsequent budget decisions by state and
local agencies, the Oregon Department of Administrative Services and the Legislative Assembly.
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION 30. The unit captions used in this 2026 Act are provided only for the conven-
ience of the reader and do not become part of the statutory law of this state or express any
legislative intent in the enactment of this 2026 Act.
SECTION 31. This 2026 Act being necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
peace, health and safety, an emergency is declared to exist, and this 2026 Act takes effect
on its passage.
[26]
