1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1565
Sponsored by Senator STARR; Senator FREDERICK, Representatives EVANS, HARBICK, HELFRICH, SCHARF (at
the request of Oregon State Snowmobile Association) (Presession filed.)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: The Act makes snowmobile fees higher. (Flesch Readability Score: 73.8).
Increases snowmobile registration fees.
Takes effect on the 91st day following adjournment sine die.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to snowmobiles; creating new provisions; amending ORS 821.320; and prescribing an effec-
tive date.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. ORS 821.320 is amended to read:
821.320. The following fees are established relating to snowmobiles:
(1) Registration under ORS 821.080, [$10] $30.
(2) Renewal of registration under ORS 821.080, [$10] $30.
(3) Issuance of out-of-state permit under ORS 821.130, $7.
SECTION 2. The amendments to ORS 821.320 by section 1 of this 2026 Act apply to fees
imposed on or after the effective date of this 2026 Act.
SECTION 3. This 2026 Act takes effect on the 91st day after the date on which the 2026
regular session of the Eighty-third Legislative Assembly adjourns sine die.
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 207
