1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1506
Sponsored by Senator TAYLOR (Presession filed.)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: Tells LPRO to conduct a study on how state labor agencies in other states are funded.
(Flesch Readability Score:
68.9).
Requires the Legislative Policy and Research Director to conduct a study of the manner in
which state labor agencies in other states are funded. Directs the director to submit findings to the
interim committees of the Legislative Assembly related to labor and business no later than Septem-
ber 15, 2027.
Sunsets on January 2, 2028.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to the Bureau of Labor and Industries.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. The Legislative Policy and Research Director shall conduct a study of the
manner in which state labor agencies in other states are funded. The director shall submit
a report in the manner provided by ORS 192.245 to the interim committees of the Legislative
Assembly related to labor and business no later than September 15, 2027. The report must
include a recommendation for a permanent funding source from other fund moneys to fund
the operations of the Bureau of Labor and Industries.
SECTION 2. Section 1 of this 2026 Act is repealed on January 2, 2028.
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 26
