1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1531
Printed pursuant to Senate Interim Rule 213.28 by order of the President of the Senate in conformance with pre-
session filing rules, indicating neither advocacy nor opposition on the part of the President (at the request
of Senate Interim Committee on Veterans, Emergency Management, Federal and World Affairs)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: The Act tells OHA to conduct a study about EMS funding. (Flesch Readability Score:
72.6).
Requires the Oregon Health Authority to study the feasibility of funding emergency medical
services through a universal health care model. Directs the authority to submit findings to the in-
terim committees of the Legislative Assembly related to emergency management no later than Sep-
tember 15, 2027.
Sunsets on January 2, 2028.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to funding for emergency medical services.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. (1) The Oregon Health Authority shall study the feasibility of funding
emergency medical services through a universal health care model that would include:
(a) A mix of public and private resources;
(b) State funding and oversight;
(c) Allocation of funding to counties and county-level oversight; and
(d) Delegated local control.
(2) The authority shall submit a report in the manner provided by ORS 192.245, and may
include recommendations for legislation, to the interim committees of the Legislative As-
sembly related to emergency management no later than September 15, 2027.
SECTION 2. Section 1 of this 2026 Act is repealed on January 2, 2028.
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 275
