1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1536
Printed pursuant to Senate Interim Rule 213.28 by order of the President of the Senate in conformance with pre-
session filing rules, indicating neither advocacy nor opposition on the part of the President (at the request
of Senate Interim Committee on Education)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: Directs ODE to conduct a study about tests given in public schools. (Flesch Readability
Score: 67.7).
Requires the Department of Education to study the adequacy of assessments administered in the
public schools of this state.
Directs the department to submit findings to the interim committees
of the Legislative Assembly related to education no later than September 15, 2027.
Sunsets on January 2, 2028.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to educational assessments.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. The Department of Education shall study the adequacy of assessments ad-
ministered in the public schools of this state. The department shall submit a report in the
manner provided by ORS 192.245, and may include recommendations for legislation, to the
interim committees of the Legislative Assembly related to education no later than September
15, 2027.
SECTION 2. Section 1 of this 2026 Act is repealed on January 2, 2028.
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 147
