1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1509
Printed pursuant to Senate Interim Rule 213.28 by order of the President of the Senate in conformance with pre-
session filing rules, indicating neither advocacy nor opposition on the part of the President (at the request
of Senate Interim Committee on Rules and Executive Appointments for Senators Kayse Jama, Bruce Starr)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: The Act allows for the switch of electors of President and Vice President if they do not
vote like they pledged. (Flesch Readability Score: 72.7).
Establishes the qualifications of an elector of President and Vice President of the United States.
Provides the contents of a certificate of ascertainment of electors. Provides that an elector who does
not vote in accordance with the signed pledge of electors vacates the office of elector. Provides for
the filling of the vacancy. Provides for mileage expenses to be given to electors who attend the
meeting of electors and whose ballot is not invalid.
Takes effect on July 1, 2026.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to electors of President and Vice President of the United States; amending ORS 248.355,
248.370 and 248.380; and prescribing an effective date.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. ORS 248.355 is amended to read:
248.355. (1) In a year when a President and Vice President of the United States are to be nom-
inated and elected, each political party nominating candidates for those offices shall select a number
of candidates for elector of President and Vice President equal to the total number of Senators and
Representatives to which this state is entitled in Congress.
(2) An individual may be selected as a candidate for elector of President and Vice Presi-
dent only if, at the time of the individual’s selection, that individual is:
(a) Registered as an elector in this state;
(b) If selected under subsection (1) of this section, registered as being affiliated with the
party selecting that individual; or
(c) If selected to fill a vacancy under ORS 248.370, registered as not being affiliated with
any political party.
[(2)] (3) Upon being selected, an individual who is selected as a candidate for elector [when
selected] shall sign a pledge stating that, if elected under ORS 248.360, the [candidate] individual
will vote in the electoral college for the winning candidates [of the party] for President and Vice
President, except as provided under ORS 248.370 (6)(b). The Secretary of State shall prescribe the
form of the pledge.
(4) The party shall certify the names of the selected candidates for elector to the Secretary of
State, and provide to the secretary the pledges signed by the candidates under subsection (3)
of this section, not later than the 70th day before the election of electors.
SECTION 2. ORS 248.370 is amended to read:
248.370. (1) The electors of President and Vice President shall convene at the State Capitol on
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 104
SB 1509
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
the first Tuesday after the second Wednesday in December following their election at a time to be
established by the Secretary of State by rule.
(2) The Secretary of State shall preside over the convening of electors under this section
and shall perform any duty as an administrator on behalf of the electors in accordance with
the requirements placed on electors under federal law and the laws of this state.
[(2)] (3) Not later than six days prior to the convening of electors under subsection (1) of this
section, the Governor and the Secretary of State shall issue a certificate of ascertainment of ap-
pointment of electors as required by 3 U.S.C. 5. The certificate of ascertainment shall contain:
(a) A statement that:
(A) The electors listed on the certificate shall serve as electors unless a vacancy occurs
in the office of elector prior to the end of the meeting convened under this section;
(B) For any vacancy that may occur prior to the end of the meeting convened under this
section, the vacancy will be filled at the meeting; and
(C) If a vacancy is filled on the day of the meeting of electors, the Governor shall submit
an amended certificate of ascertainment certifying the names of the final list of electors who
presented valid ballots to the Secretary of State at the meeting; and
(b) A security feature or features for the purpose of verifying the authenticity of the certificate.
The Secretary of State shall determine by rule the form of the security feature or features under this
subsection.
[(3)] (4)(a) If there is any vacancy in the office of an elector caused by death, refusal to act,
[neglect] failure to attend the meeting of electors or otherwise, the Secretary of State shall
declare the vacancy, and the remaining electors present shall fill the vacancy by plurality of
voice votes at the time and place of the convening of electors under subsection (1) of this section.
The Governor and the Secretary of State shall issue an amended certificate of ascertainment in
accordance with the requirements of subsection (3) of this section containing the name of any
elector who fills a vacancy under this subsection and indicating that the amended certificate is
to be substituted for the certificate that was previously issued under subsection (3) of this
section.
[(4)] (b) Prior to the voice vote to fill a vacancy under paragraph (a) of this subsection [(3)
of this section], a candidate for filling the vacancy shall sign the pledge required under ORS 248.355.
(5) When all the electors have appeared and any vacancies have been filled under subsection
(4) of this section, the electors shall take and subscribe to an oath of office administered by the
Secretary of State. Following the taking of the oath of office under this subsection, the electors shall
perform the duties required of them by the Constitution and laws of the United States.
(6)(a) Each elector shall complete two ballots, one for President and one for Vice Presi-
dent. The elector shall cast a vote for the winning candidate for each office, except as pro-
vided under paragraph (b) of this subsection.
(b) If the winning candidate for President or Vice President dies or withdraws after the
date of the election but before the meeting of electors, the electors shall vote for the re-
placement to the winning candidate who is selected in accordance with the rules and bylaws
of the political party that nominated the winning candidate.
(7) Each elector shall present that elector’s completed ballots for President and Vice
President under subsection (6) of this section to the Secretary of State.
(8)(a) The Secretary of State shall examine each ballot presented under subsection (7) of
this section to determine whether the ballot is completed in accordance with the pledge
[2]
SB 1509
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
signed by the elector under ORS 248.355. Any ballot that is unmarked or is not completed in
accordance with the pledge is invalid and may not be counted.
(b) The secretary shall declare that an elector who presents an invalid ballot has vacated
the office of elector and that the office is vacant.
(c) For any vacancy declared under paragraph (b) of this subsection, the remaining
electors present shall fill the vacancy by plurality of voice vote. Prior to the voice vote to
fill a vacancy under this paragraph, a candidate for filling the vacancy shall sign the pledge
required under ORS 248.355. The Governor and the Secretary of State shall issue an amended
certificate of ascertainment in accordance with the requirements of subsection (3) of this
section containing the name of any elector who fills a vacancy under this paragraph and in-
dicating that the amended certificate is to be substituted for the certificate that was previ-
ously issued under subsection (3) of this section.
(d) The elector who fills a vacancy under this subsection shall take and subscribe to an
oath of office administered by the Secretary of State and shall vote in accordance with sub-
section (6) of this section.
(9) After each elector has completed and presented ballots for President and Vice Presi-
dent, and the Secretary of State has determined that each ballot is valid, the secretary shall
prepare certificates of vote in accordance with the requirements of 3 U.S.C. 9. The certif-
icates of vote must be signed and transmitted in accordance with 3 U.S.C. 9, 10 and 11.
(10) The Secretary of State may adopt rules for the administration of this section.
[(6) The Secretary of State shall preside over the convening of electors under this section and shall
perform any duty as an administrator on behalf of the electors in accordance with the requirements
placed on electors under federal law and the laws of this state.]
SECTION 3. ORS 248.380 is amended to read:
248.380. An elector of President and Vice President of the United States who attends at the time
and place appointed and votes for President and Vice President, and whose ballot is not deter-
mined by the Secretary of State to be invalid under ORS 248.370, shall be entitled to receive
from this state mileage expenses at the rate allowed to members of the Legislative Assembly.
SECTION 4. This 2026 Act takes effect on July 1, 2026.
[3]
