1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1502
Sponsored by Senator WAGNER, Representative FAHEY, Senators JAMA, STARR, Representatives BOWMAN,
ELMER
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: The Act tells the SOS to file a bill for the 2027 session that sets forth ideas to implement
campaign finance limits. The Act takes effect 91 days after sine die. (Flesch Readability Score: 71.0).
Directs the Secretary of State to presession file a proposed legislative measure for consideration
during the 2027 regular session of the Legislative Assembly that sets forth the recommendations of
the secretary for changes to campaign finance limitations presently being implemented in this state.
Takes effect on the 91st day following adjournment sine die.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to proposed legislative measures to be filed by the Secretary of State; and prescribing an
effective date.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. (1) The Secretary of State shall exercise the secretary’s authority under
ORS 171.130 (2)(c) to presession file a proposed legislative measure for consideration during
the 2027 regular session of the Legislative Assembly.
(2) The measure that the Secretary of State presession files pursuant to subsection (1)
of this section shall set forth the recommendations of the secretary for changes to the sys-
tem of campaign finance limitations being implemented in this state and to reporting re-
quirements related to these limitations. The provisions of the measure shall reflect the
progress and experience in implementing chapter 9, Oregon Laws 2024.
SECTION 2. If House Bill 4018 becomes law, section 1 of this 2026 Act is amended to read:
Sec. 1. (1) The Secretary of State shall exercise the secretary’s authority under ORS 171.130
(2)(c) to presession file a proposed legislative measure for consideration during the 2027 regular
session of the Legislative Assembly.
(2) The measure that the Secretary of State presession files pursuant to subsection (1) of this
section shall set forth the recommendations of the secretary for changes to the system of campaign
finance limitations being implemented in this state and to reporting requirements related to these
limitations. The provisions of the measure shall reflect the progress and experience in implementing
chapter 9, Oregon Laws 2024, and chapter
, Oregon Laws 2026 (Enrolled House Bill 4018).
SECTION 3. This 2026 Act takes effect on the 91st day after the date on which the 2026
regular session of the Eighty-third Legislative Assembly adjourns sine die.
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 342
