1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1552
Sponsored by Senator GIROD (Presession filed.)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: The Act would make the county clerk let an owner know when the clerk gets a docu-
ment that affects the title to the owner’s real property. The Act would make an exception for doc-
uments that are turned in by real estate professionals. (Flesch Readability Score: 66.6).
Requires the county clerk to notify the owner of real property when an instrument affecting the
title to the property is presented for recordation unless presented by a financial institution, an
insurer or an attorney, or an employee or agent of the professional person.
Declares an emergency, effective on passage.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to the transfer of real property; and declaring an emergency.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. Section 2 of this 2026 Act is added to and made a part of ORS 205.130 to
205.220.
SECTION 2. (1) Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, the county clerk shall
notify the owner of record of real property upon receipt of an instrument that affects the
title to the real property and is required to be recorded under ORS 205.130 (2)(a). The notice
shall be sent to the owner’s last known address in the records of the county clerk.
(2) The county clerk is not required to provide notice to the owner of record of the
property if the instrument is presented for recordation by:
(a) A financial institution described in ORS 205.460 (7);
(b) An insurer with a certificate of authority to transact title insurance in this state;
(c) A licensee or associate licensee of the Oregon State Bar authorized to practice real
estate law in this state; or
(d) An employee or agent presenting the instrument on behalf of a person described in
paragraph (a), (b) or (c) of this subsection.
(3) The county clerk may charge the person presenting an instrument that requires no-
tice under subsection (1) of this section a per-instrument fee not to exceed the lesser of:
(a) $20; or
(b) The actual cost to the county clerk of providing the notice.
SECTION 3. This 2026 Act being necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
peace, health and safety, an emergency is declared to exist, and this 2026 Act takes effect
on its passage.
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 297
