1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1514
Printed pursuant to Senate Interim Rule 213.28 by order of the President of the Senate in conformance with pre-
session filing rules, indicating neither advocacy nor opposition on the part of the President (at the request
of Senate Interim Committee on Commerce and General Government)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: The Act would repeal the law that set a state standard for city and county laws that
govern the use of public property by the homeless. (Flesch Readability Score: 63.3).
Repeals the statute enacted by House Bill 3115 (2021) that established objective reasonableness
as a statewide standard, for city and county laws regulating the use of public property with respect
to persons experiencing homelessness, as the basis for a cause of action for injunctive and
declaratory relief to challenge such laws and as an affirmative defense in the prosecution of vio-
lations of such laws.
Declares an emergency, effective on passage.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to the regulation of public property with respect to persons experiencing homelessness;
repealing ORS 195.530; and declaring an emergency.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. ORS 195.530 is repealed.
SECTION 2. This 2026 Act being necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
peace, health and safety, an emergency is declared to exist, and this 2026 Act takes effect
on its passage.
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 296
