1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1528
Printed pursuant to Senate Interim Rule 213.28 by order of the President of the Senate in conformance with pre-
session filing rules, indicating neither advocacy nor opposition on the part of the President (at the request
of Senate Interim Committee on Health Care)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: The Act tells OHA to study health care. (Flesch Readability Score: 92.9).
Requires the Oregon Health Authority to study health care.
Directs the authority to submit
findings to the interim committees of the Legislative Assembly related to health care no later than
September 15, 2027.
Sunsets on January 2, 2028.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to health care.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. The Oregon Health Authority shall study health care. The authority shall
submit a report in the manner provided by ORS 192.245, and may include recommendations
for legislation, to the interim committees of the Legislative Assembly related to health care
no later than September 15, 2027.
SECTION 2. Section 1 of this 2026 Act is repealed on January 2, 2028.
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 101
