1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1525
Printed pursuant to Senate Interim Rule 213.28 by order of the President of the Senate in conformance with pre-
session filing rules, indicating neither advocacy nor opposition on the part of the President (at the request
of Senate Interim Committee on Energy and Environment)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: This Act creates the Blue Economy Task Force and lets the Oregon Ocean Science Trust
form a nonprofit. (Flesch Readability Score: 66.3).
Establishes the Blue Economy Task Force. Directs the task force to study Oregon’s blue econ-
omy and submit a report to the Legislative Assembly no later than September 15, 2027.
Authorizes the Oregon Ocean Science Trust to create and maintain a nonprofit organization.
Takes effect on the 91st day following adjournment sine die.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to organizations relevant to Oregon’s coastal resources; and prescribing an effective date.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
BLUE ECONOMY TASK FORCE
SECTION 1. (1) The Blue Economy Task Force is established.
(2) The task force consists of no less than 13 members appointed as follows:
(a) The President of the Senate shall appoint one member from among the members of
the Senate.
(b) The Speaker of the House of Representatives shall appoint one member from among
members of the House of Representatives.
(c) The President and the Speaker shall jointly appoint no less than 11 members to rep-
resent:
(A) Public or private research institutions;
(B) Businesses innovating in blue economy sectors;
(C) Fisheries businesses;
(D) The tourism industry;
(E) Environmental organizations; and
(F) Equity investors in blue economy businesses.
(3)(a) The task force shall study and prepare a report on:
(A) The sectors of Oregon’s blue economy;
(B) Existing economic development plans or strategies for the blue economy; and
(C) Opportunities for the State of Oregon to facilitate or enhance the growth of
sustainable blue economy businesses while preserving and protecting Oregon’s coastal
ecosystems.
(b) The report must include:
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 219
SB 1525
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
(A) Identification and synthesis of existing state or regional studies, market analyses and
federal and state programs relevant to the blue economy in Oregon.
(B) Identification of existing state and local initiatives, including workforce programs,
efforts by research centers, efforts by ports, grant programs and permitting pathways, to
determine where existing efforts overlap, could be expanded to fill in gaps and present op-
portunities to be integrated into a unified strategic plan.
(C) A review and evaluation of efforts conducted by other states or countries to identify
best practices and policies to build sustainable innovation in the blue economy.
(D) Prioritized recommendations specific to subject areas that include policy, investment,
workforce development, research and development and regulatory coordination.
(E) A roadmap for implementing the recommendations of the task force that may include
the establishment of a center for the blue economy.
(4) A majority of the members of the task force constitutes a quorum for the transaction
of business.
(5) Official action by the task force requires the approval of a majority of the members
of the task force.
(6) The President and the Speaker shall jointly select one member of the task force to
serve as chairperson and another to serve as vice chairperson, for the terms and with the
duties and powers necessary for the performance of the functions of the offices as the
President and the Speaker determine.
(7) If there is a vacancy for any cause, the appointing authority shall make an appoint-
ment to become immediately effective.
(8) The task force shall meet at times and places specified by the call of the chairperson
or of a majority of the members of the task force.
(9) The task force may adopt rules necessary for the operation of the task force.
(10) The task force shall submit a report in the manner provided by ORS 192.245, and
may include recommendations for legislation, to the interim committees of the Legislative
Assembly related to the environment no later than September 15, 2027.
(11)(a) The Legislative Policy and Research Office shall provide staff support to the task
force.
(b) The task force, through the office, may contract for services necessary to carry out
the duties and functions of the task force.
(12) Members of the task force who are not members of the Legislative Assembly serve
as volunteers on the task force and, unless they are qualified members, as defined in ORS
292.495, are not entitled to compensation or reimbursement for expenses.
(13) All agencies of state government, as defined in ORS 174.111, are directed to assist
the task force in the performance of the duties of the task force and, to the extent permitted
by laws relating to confidentiality, to furnish information and advice the members of the task
force consider necessary to perform their duties.
(14) All appointments to the task force made under subsection (2) of this section must
be completed no later than 60 days after the effective date of this 2026 Act.
(15) The task force shall have its first meeting no later than 90 days after the effective
date of this 2026 Act.
SECTION 2. Section 1 of this 2026 Act is repealed on December 31, 2027.
[2]
SB 1525
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
OREGON OCEAN SCIENCE TRUST
SECTION 3. Pursuant to ORS 196.566, the Oregon Ocean Science Trust may create and
maintain an entity that is exempt from federal income tax under section 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code, as amended, for the purpose of advancing the mission of the trust.
CAPTIONS AND EFFECTIVE DATE
SECTION 4. The unit captions used in this 2026 Act are provided only for the convenience
of the reader and do not become part of the statutory law of this state or express any leg-
islative intent in the enactment of this 2026 Act.
SECTION 5. This 2026 Act takes effect on the 91st day after the date on which the 2026
regular session of the Eighty-third Legislative Assembly adjourns sine die.
[3]
