1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
83rd OREGON LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--2026 Regular Session
Senate Bill 1563
Sponsored by Senators HAYDEN, STARR, Representative DIEHL (Presession filed.)
SUMMARY
The following summary is not prepared by the sponsors of the measure and is not a part of the body thereof subject
to consideration by the Legislative Assembly. It is an editor’s brief statement of the essential features of the
measure as introduced. The statement includes a measure digest written in compliance with applicable readability
standards.
Digest: The Act lets a person whose civil rights have been violated by a person acting under
the color of law sue for damages and other relief. The Act lets a plaintiff who wins this type of suit
recover attorney fees. The Act lets a defendant who wins this type of suit recover attorney fees if
the plaintiff’s claim was frivolous. (Flesch Readability Score: 62.7).
Allows a person who has been deprived of rights, privileges or immunities secured by the
Oregon Constitution or the laws of this state by a person acting under color of law to bring a civil
action for economic and noneconomic damages and for injunctive or other equitable relief.
Provides for the award of attorney fees and costs to a prevailing plaintiff, or to a prevailing
defendant if the court finds that a plaintiff’s claim was frivolous, unreasonable or without founda-
tion.
Takes effect on the 91st day following adjournment sine die.
A BILL FOR AN ACT
Relating to civil rights; and prescribing an effective date.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. (1) Any person who has been deprived of any rights, privileges or immunities
secured by Article I of the Oregon Constitution by a person acting under color of law may
bring a civil action for economic and noneconomic damages, as defined in ORS 31.705, and
for injunctive or other equitable relief.
(2) ORS 30.260 to 30.300 apply to an action under this section.
(3)(a) The court shall award reasonable attorney fees and costs to a prevailing plaintiff
in an action under this section.
(b) The court may award reasonable attorney fees and costs to a prevailing defendant in
an action under this section only if the court determines that the plaintiff’s claim under this
section was frivolous, unreasonable or without foundation.
SECTION 2. Section 1 of this 2026 Act applies to deprivations of rights, privileges or im-
munities secured by Article I of the Oregon Constitution that occur on or after the effective
date of this 2026 Act.
SECTION 3. This 2026 Act takes effect on the 91st day after the date on which the 2026
regular session of the Eighty-third Legislative Assembly adjourns sine die.
NOTE:
Matter in boldfaced type in an amended section is new; matter [italic and bracketed] is existing law to be omitted.
New sections are in boldfaced type.
LC 214
